International Journal of Web & Semantic Technology (IJWesT) Vol.2, No.2, April 2011 
DOI : 10.5121/ijwest.2011.2203                                                                                                                    27 
 
A MACHINE LEARNING BASED ANALYTICAL 
FRAMEWORK FOR SEMANTIC ANNOTATION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
Hamed Hassanzadeh1 and MohammadReza Keyvanpour2 
1Department of Electronic, Computer and IT, Islamic Azad University, Qazvin Branch, 
Qazvin, Iran 
and member of Young Researchers Club 

2Department of Computer Engineering, Alzahra University, Tehran, Iran 

 
ABSTRACT 
The Semantic Web is an extension of the current web in which information is given well-defined meaning. 
The perspective of Semantic Web is to promote the quality and intelligence of the current web by changing 
its contents into machine understandable form. Therefore, semantic level information is one of the 
cornerstones of the Semantic Web. The process of adding semantic metadata to web resources is called 
Semantic Annotation. There are many obstacles against the Semantic Annotation, such as multilinguality, 
scalability, and issues which are related to diversity and inconsistency in content of different web pages. 
Due to the wide range of domains and the dynamic environments that the Semantic Annotation systems 
must be performed on, the problem of automating annotation process is one of the significant challenges in 
this domain. To overcome this problem, different machine learning approaches such as supervised 
learning, unsupervised learning and more recent ones like, semi-supervised learning and active learning 
have been utilized. In this paper we present an inclusive layered classification of Semantic Annotation 
challenges and discuss the most important issues in this field. Also, we review and analyze machine 
learning applications for solving semantic annotation problems. For this goal, the article tries to closely 
study and categorize related researches for better understanding and to reach a framework that can map 
machine learning techniques into the Semantic Annotation challenges and requirements. 
KEYWORDS 
Semantic Web, Semantic Annotation, Machine Learning. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The majority of today's World Wide Web's content is designed for humans to read and 
understand, not for machines and computer programs to manipulate meaningfully. Computers can 
adeptly parse Web pages for layout and routine processing but, in general, machines have no 
reliable way to process the semantics. In addition, the number of web pages is increasing 
dramatically each day so the keyword based search engines cannot help users to find out their 
interest in an efficient way. The Semantic Web is an extension of the World Wide Web, in which 
information is given well-defined meaning, better enabling computers and people to work in  

International Journal of Web & Semantic Technology (IJWesT) Vol.2, No.2, April 2011 
28 
 
cooperation [1]. The idea of semantic web is to leave most of tasks and decisions to machines. 
This is applicable with adding knowledge to web contents by understandable languages for 
machine and establish intelligent software agents that able to process this information. On the 
other hand, while the Semantic Web consists of structured information and explicit metadata, it 
paves the way to rapidly access information and ability of semantic search. 
 
In a semantic based environment, to ensure that all the machines have a common understanding 
from metadata tags and to be able to communicate and cooperate to each other, there is a need for 
a shared repository that defines all the concepts. In semantic Web, ontology acts as this shared 
repository of semantics [2]. An ontology is commonly defined as an explicit, formal specification 
of a shared conceptualization of an domain of interest. This means that an ontology describes 
some application-relevant part of the world in a machine-understandable way [3]. In other words, 
ontology is considered as a tool that defines additional meanings that tagged to web pages and 
makes them available to be used by software agents and web applications [4]. 
 
The Semantic Web vision is of a Web in which resources are accessible not only to humans, but 
also to automated processes. The automation of tasks depends on elevating the status of the web 
from machine-readable to something we might call machine-understandable. The key idea is to 
have data on the web defined and linked in such a way that its meaning is explicitly interpretable 
by software processes rather than just being implicitly interpretable by humans. 
To realize this vision, it will be necessary to associate metadata with web resources. One 
mechanism for associating such metadata is annotation. In particular, we may wish to annotate 
resources with semantic metadata that provides some indication of the content of a resource. This 
is a further step along the way from simple textual annotations, as the intention within the 
Semantic Web context is that this information will be accessible not only to humans but also to 
software agents [5]. The process of adding these metadata is called Semantic Annotation. 
Regarding to large amount of documents that must be annotated in a wide spread domain such as 
the Web, it’s obvious that manually annotating is would be an expensive, time consuming, and 
generally inefficient task. So, one of the most serious problems in semantic annotation domain is 
to automate this process. One way to handle this problem is to utilize machine learning 
techniques.  
Machine Learning is the study of computer algorithms that improve automatically through 
experiences [6]. Various learning techniques are classified in for groups, i.e. supervised learning, 
unsupervised learning, semi-supervised learning, and active learning. Different machine learning 
approaches have been proposed for semantic annotation automation [7, 8]. 
In this paper, at first we present an inclusive layered classification of divers semantic annotation 
challenges and demonstrate that automation is one of the most important issues in this field. 
Then, we introduce an analytical framework which collects and closely study the approaches that 
use different machine learning techniques. This framework can give a guideline for future 
researches on the Semantic Web. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follow; section 2 reviews the semantic annotation problem 
and its tasks and goals. Section 3 briefly reviews some related works. In section 4 a classification 
of semantic annotation challenges is presented. In section 5 we present and discuss our analytical 
framework. And section 6 presents our conclusions and directions for future works. 

International Journal of Web & Semantic Technology (IJWesT) Vol.2, No.2, April 2011 
29 
 
2. SEMANTIC ANNOTATION 
 
In general, the annotation defines as the process of adding notes and comments to documents, 
images, or any resources. In the Web domain, annotation means adding information such as 
notes, commentary, links to source material, and so on, to existing web-accessible documents 
without changing the originals [9]. These annotations are meant to be shareable, also over the 
network, although notes would be useful even if they couldn’t be shared. The annotation process 
can be done manually, automatically, and semi-automatically. Concisely, semantic annotation 
means appending machine understandable metadata to resources. We consider Semantic 
Annotation the idea of assigning to the entities in the text links to their semantic descriptions [10]. 
Manual annotation is more easily accomplished today, using authoring tools such as Semantic 
Word [11], which provide an integrated environment for simultaneously authoring and annotating 
text. However, the use of human annotators is often fraught with errors due to factors such as 
annotator familiarity with the domain, amount of training, personal motivation and complex 
schemas. Manual annotation is also an expensive process, and often does not consider that 
multiple perspectives of a data source, requiring multiple ontologies, can be beneficial to support 
the needs of different users [12]. By considering the large number of web documents and wide 
range of domains, it is obvious that semantic annotation task and beside it ontology development 
and enhancement, cannot be done in a manual and concentrative manner. Generally, the 
ineffectiveness of manual annotation can be described in these two conditions: 
• It’s cumbersome and time consuming; because of large amount of tasks and resources, 
• It’s objective; different opinions can result in inconsistent knowledge. 
Semantic annotation in a manual manner can easily result in a knowledge enhancement 
bottleneck [13]. For facing this problem different automatic and semi-automatic approaches are 
introduced. In Figure 1 an overview of semantic annotation and the effective technologies in it is 
depicted. 
Ontologies are the key elements of the most semantic annotation systems. Ontological structures 
may give additional value to semantic annotations. They allow for additional possibilities on the 
resulting semantic annotations, such as inferencing or conceptual navigation that we have 
mentioned before. But also the reference to a commonly agreed set of concepts by itself 
constitutes an additional value through its normative function. Furthermore, an ontology directs 
the attention of the annotator to a predefined choice of semantic structures and, hence, gives some 
guidance about what and how items residing in the documents may be annotated. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

International Journal of Web & Semantic Technology (IJWesT) Vol.2, No.2, April 2011 
30 
 
   
   
 
Figure 1. An overview of semantic annotation and effective technologies 
3. RELATED WORKS 
Different semantic annotation tools and systems have been developed during years after advent of 
semantic web technology. These tools and systems which are called semantic annotation 
platforms can be classified based on the type of annotation method used in them [12]. There are 
two primary categories, Pattern-based and Machine Learning-based, as shown in Figure 2. In 
addition, platforms can use methods from both types of categories, called Multistrategy, in order 
to take advantage of the strengths, and compensate for the weaknesses, of the methods in each 
category. 
Pattern-based approaches can perform pattern discovery or have patterns manually defined. Most 
of these methods follow the process in which an initial set of entities is defined at the beginning 
and the corpus is scanned to find the patterns that contain the entities. New entities are 
discovered, along with new patterns. This process continues recursively until no more entities are 
discovered or the user stops the process. Annotation can also be generated by using manual rules 
to find entities in text [12]. 
Machine learning-based semantic annotation platforms utilize two methods: probability and 
induction. Probabilistic semantic annotation platforms use statistical models to predict the 
locations of entities within text. 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Semantic Annotation 
Ontology 

International Journal of Web & Semantic Technology (IJWesT) Vol.2, No.2, April 2011 
31 
 
 
              Figure 2. An overview of semantic annotation and effective technologies [12] 
4. CLASSIFICATION OF SEMANTIC ANNOTATION CHALLENGES  
There are many challenges and obstacles in semantic annotation domain that lead to several 
research opportunities. The process of semantically annotating documents is a well-known 
challenge for the Semantic Web per se [14]. So, in this section we present an analytical review of 
all these obstacles. Regarding to different problems that emerge for enhancing the content of 
current web pages and developing domain ontoligies, we classify the challenges of semantic 
annotation systems into two inclusive classes: a) general challenges, and b) technical challenges. 
The general challenges category refers to those obstacles that exist regardless of technical and 
algorithmic considerations, such as multilinguality and scalability problems. But technical 
challenges contain the problems that relate to implementation and performance of a semantic 
annotation system [5,12,15-19].  Figure 3 reveals a comprehensive classification of semantic 
annotation challenges. 
The general challenges category is divided into two classes of linguistic and content related 
obstacles. Multilinguality means that the contents of web pages are written in different languages. 
This characteristic is a hurdle against making a general and comprehensive annotation system. In 
addition, whereby ontologis are created in different languages, this makes some problem for 
annotation and communication between ontologies. Standardization of semantic annotation 
languages is another challenge in this category. By standardizing these languages it would be 
possible to reach a consistency and homogeneity among web pages. With standardizing the 
output structure of semantic annotation systems, it would be able to face the problem of 
multilinguality by using automatic translation tools that work on these standard structures.  
 
Multistrategy 
Pattern-based 
Machine Learning-based 
Discovery 
Rules 
Probabilistic 
Induction 
- Seed expansion 
- JAPE (Java 
Annotation Pattern 
Engine) 
- Taxonomy label 
matching 
-Hidden Markov 
Models (HMMs) 
- N-gram analysis 
- Linguistic 
- Structural 
 

International Journal of Web & Semantic Technology (IJWesT) Vol.2, No.2, April 2011 
32 
 
In the content related challenges category, the semantic annotation obstacles are divided into 
three classes; heterogeneity of documents format, scalability, and dynamic documents. Diversity 
in web pages is common feature in web domain, but in semantic annotation area, this 
characteristic turn into a drawback. This feature can make problems for creating semantic 
annotation tools even in a specific domain. 
 
                                         Figure 3. Classification of Semantic Annotation Challenges 
One of the other web characteristic that has the same impact like heterogeneity on semantic 
annotation is dynamic feature of web pages, that is, the continuous changing and updating of web 
pages. Handling large volume of web documents is another challenge that semantic annotation 
systems must deal with it. Another factor that intensifies this problem is the wide range of 
domains in the content of the web pages. While the goal of semantic annotation process is 
recognizing concepts and adds the proper semantic metadata to the web pages, it’s obvious that 
handling different domains is a serious problem in this field.  
The technical challenges are categorized into two main classes; implementation challenges and 
usage challenges. The first and the most important challenge in the field of semantic annotation is 
automation of annotation systems. As we mentioned before, manual annotation is an expensive 
and time consuming task. Also, to annotate large amount of web documents with different 
domains, it is crucial to automate the process of semantic annotation. Another obstacle in this  
Semantic Annotation 
Challenges 
General 
Technical 
Content
Language
Scalability 
Implementation
Numerous 
concepts 
Numerous 
Web pages 
Dynamic 
documents 
Heterogeneous 
documents 
format
Standardization
Multilinguality
Diverse 
domains 
Usage
Speed 
Accuracy
Ontology 
development
Concept 
disambiguation
Appropriate  
concept recognition
Design
user 
interface
Automatio

Supporting 
Ontology 
Computational 
Complexity 
Lack of training
labeled examples
Time 
Complexity 

International Journal of Web & Semantic Technology (IJWesT) Vol.2, No.2, April 2011 
33 
 
class of challenges is computational complexity of annotation algorithms especially NLP based 
approaches. While semantic annotation systems want to face a large scale problem, they must 
have an acceptable time performance.  
Other class of challenges is emerged after the development of annotation systems. In our 
classification we categorized these challenges under the group of usage challenges. Due to large 
amount of resources that semantic annotation systems face with them, they must perform the 
annotation process in an acceptable time. On the other hand, there may be many ambiguous 
concepts that annotation systems must recognize them correctly, so disambiguation of concepts is 
another problem that must be handling by these systems. During annotation process it is possible 
to extract new concepts that there would be no definition for them in the domain ontology. It’s an 
effective feature for an annotation system to be able to add these concepts to the ontology. 
5. ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK 
In this section we present the analytical framework show the efficiency of different machine 
learning applications in addressing some of the semantic annotation challenges. This framework 
is introduced in Table 1. It tries to reveal the relation of effective machine learning techniques to 
deal with some semantic annotation challenges and development of the annotation systems. The 
classification of semantic annotation systems in this framework is based on machine learning 
approaches, so there are five classes: 
• 
Supervised Learning 
• 
Unsupervised Learning 
• 
Semi-supervised Learning 
• 
Active Learning 
• 
Hybrid of semi-supervised learning and active learning 
In an extensive and fast changing research area such as semantic annotation, which itself is a 
cornerstone for semantic web, it is not possible to review all the approaches and tools that 
continuously are introduced every day. So in this paper we only select some approaches that are 
related to different machine learning techniques. For this goal, we try to mention some well-
known and new methods in this area.  
In our framework some of annotation systems are reviewed; a concise description of systems is 
shown and the way that these systems utilize ontologies is described. In addition, we study these 
systems regard to the way that their annotation process are performed, i.e. manual, semi-
automatic, or automatic. And then, the scope of these systems is described briefly. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

International Journal of Web & Semantic Technology (IJWesT) Vol.2, No.2, April 2011 
34 
        
Table 1. Analytical Framework of Machine Learning Approaches for Semantic Annotation 
 
Semantic Annotation 
Systems 
Description 
Ontology 
Development 
Automation 
Application 
Scope 
Supervised 
Learning 
Action  [19] 
Uses classification for 
determining and separating 
different events 
Supporting 
Ontology 
Manual 
Domain 
dependent 
 RCSSAT  [20] 
Relation classification by 
using a new lexicon to 
provide semantic behavior 
features of words, and 
using kernel method to 
model lexical features  
- 
Manual 
General 
 AnnoTex [21] 
Annotating based on 
classifying documents by 
means of semantic 
similarities 
Supporting 
Ontology 
Manual 
Domain 
dependent 
  KZMCM [22] 
Using text mining for semi-
automatically semantic 
annotation 
Supporting 
Ontology 
Semi-
automatic 
Domain 
dependent 
SOZEKAMM  [23] 
Automation of the 
generation of 
an annotation schema for a 
given semantic domain 
using a supervised 
categorical clustering 
algorithm LIMBO 
- 
Semi-
automatic 
Domain 
dependent 
CAFETIERE [24] 
Using text mining 
techniques to propose 
annotation suggestions 
Supporting 
Ontology 
Semi-
automatic 
Domain 
dependent 
Unsupervised 
BroMo  [25] 
Using clustering for blogs 
and article semantic 
annotation 
- 
Semi-
automatic 
General 
   OEAKM [26] 
Built an ontology enabled 
annotation and knowledge 
management system that 
provides clustering and 
real-time discussion for 
collaborative learning 
Supporting 
Ontology 
Semi-
automatic 
General 
PARMENIDES [27] 
Using clustering for the 
establishment of ontologies 
and the semantic 
annotation of documents 
with the concepts, entities 
and events depicted in the 
ontologies 
Supporting and 
enhancing 
Ontology 
Semi-
automatic 
General 
ASWSACC  [28] 
A machine learning-based 
semantic web annotation 
tool that learns by mining 
association rules among 
words through the text. 
Supporting 
Ontology 
Semi-
automatic 
General 
 
 EOAAC [29] 
Using association rule 
mining to extract co-
occurrences of concepts 
Supporting and 
enhancing 
Ontology 
Semi-
automatic 
Domain 
dependent 
Semi-
supervised 
Learning 
Self-teaching SVM-
struct [30] 
Proposing a novel self-
teaching SVM-struct model 
to improve the performance 
of semantic annotation with 
fewer labeled examples 
Supporting 
Ontology 
Automatic 
General 
LVNER [31] 
Presenting a simple semi-
supervised learning 
- 
Automatic 
General 

International Journal of Web & Semantic Technology (IJWesT) Vol.2, No.2, April 2011 
35 
algorithm for named entity 
recognition using 
conditional random fields 
(CRFs) 
Active 
Learning 
ASCUM [32] 
Proposing a SVM-struct 
based active learning 
algorithm for automatic 
semantic annotation 
Supporting 
Ontology 
Semi-
automatic 
General 
Hybrid of 
Semi-
supervised and 
Active 
Learning 
TM [33] 
A hybrid approach that 
annotate confident samples 
automatically and leave 
other uncertain samples to 
be labeled by a human 
annotator 
- 
Semi-
automatic 
General 
LSWW [34] 
Proposing a combination of 
active learning and self-
training method to reduce 
the labeling effort for 
Chinese Named Entity 
Recognition and 
Annotation 
- 
Semi-
automatic 
General 
1L-SP SSAL [35] 
A token level combination 
of semi-supervised and 
active learning with a 
variance based confidence 
measure 
- 
Semi-
automatic 
General 
 
6. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we present an inclusive layered classification of semantic annotation challenges. 
This classification represents almost all of the challenges that are mentioned in various 
researches. Due to the wide range of domains and the dynamic environments that the semantic 
annotation systems must be performed on, we discussed that automating the annotation process is 
a vital requirement for semantic annotation systems. So, automation is one of the most serious 
challenges in this field. Then we reviewed and analyzed machine learning applications for solving 
semantic annotation challenges such as ontology development, scalability, and more specifically 
the automation problem.  
From this point of view, we presented an analytical framework regarding these applications. In 
this framework some of the annotation systems based on the important features in this domain are 
reviewed. Results show that different learning approaches have great impact to solve semantic 
annotation challenges. Whereby most of the systems use supervised and unsupervised techniques 
in their methods, it seems that more researches are required to be directed to the applications of 
newer learning techniques such as semi-supervised and active learning. Also, preparing labeled 
corpora for training learner’s models is one of the significant issues in many text based tasks, so 
approaches such as semi-supervised learning and active learning that deal with reduction of 
labeling costs can be very efficient in semantic annotation systems. Furthermore, it’s shown that a 
combination of these two approaches can outperform many individual systems. 
 
 
 

International Journal of Web & Semantic Technology (IJWesT) Vol.2, No.2, April 2011 
36
