UAI2001 
HAUSKRECHT & UPFAL 
219 
A Clustering Approach to Solving Large Stochastic Matching Problems 
Milos Hauskrecht 
Department of Computer Science 
Mineral Industries Building 
University of Pittsburgh 
Pittsburgh, PA 15260 

Abstract 
In this work we focus on efficient heuristics for 
solving a class of stochastic planning problems 
that arise in a variety of business, investment, and 
industrial applications. The problem is best de­
scribed in terms of future buy and sell contracts. 
By buying less reliable, but less expensive, buy 
(supply) contracts, a company or a trader can 
cover a position of more reliable and more expen­
sive sell contracts. The goal is to maximize the 
expected net gain (profit) by constructing a close 
to optimum portfolio out of the available buy and 
sell contracts. This stochastic planning problem 
can be formulated as a two-stage stochastic linear 
programming problem with recourse. However, 
this formalization leads to solutions that are ex­
ponential in the number of possible failure com­
binations. Thus, this approach is not feasible for 
large scale problems. In this work we investi­
gate heuristic approximation techniques alleviat­
ing the efficiency problem. We primarily focus 
on the clustering approach and devise heuristics 
for finding clusterings leading to good approxi­
mations. We illustrate the quality and feasibility 
of the approach through experimental data. 
1 
Introduction 
While many practical decision and planning problems can 
be modeled and solved as deterministic optimization prob­
lems, a significant portion of real world problems is further 
complicated by the presence of uncertainty in the prob­
lem parameters. 
In solving such problems one not only 
faces the complexity of the original optimization problem 
but also the complexity arising from random fluctuations 
of parameters and global criteria summarizing and quanti­
fying all possible random behaviors. The challenge here is 
to devise methods capable of efficiently solving large scale 
instances of such problems. 
Eli Upfal 
Department of Computer Science, Box 1910 
Brown University 
Providence, RI 02912 

In this paper we investigate a class of stochastic planning 
problems that arise in roany business, investment and in­
dustrial applications. We term this problem stochastic con­
tract matching and formulate it in terms of optimizing a 
portfolio of future (call) contracts [15] (the same optimiza­
tion problem comes up in a variety of other applications 
such as insurance contracts). A call contract is an option 
to buy a given commodity at a given price. A call con­
tract has a default clause specifying the penalty that the 
seller of the contract pays if the contract cannot be satis­
fied. In volatile markets of commodities such as energy 
(gas, electricity) and communication bandwidth there is a 
big price spread between "reliable" contracts with high de­
fault penalties and "less reliable" contracts with relatively 
negligible penalties. By buying a collection ofless reliable, 
but less expensive contracts a trader can cover, at a signif­
icant profit, a position of expensive, reliable, contracts that 
he had sold to clients. 
In our formalization a buy contract is a call contract bought 
by the trader (typically a less expensive and less reliable 
contract), and a sell contract is a call contract sold by the 
trader to a client (typically, a more expensive and more re­
liable contract). Each buy contract can cover one of a set 
of sell contracts. The goal is to maximize the expected net 
gain (profit) by constructing a close to optimum portfolio 
out of the available buy and sell contracts. 
The gain of 
the portfolio is the revenue from selling the "sell" contract 
minus the cost of purchasing the "buy" contracts and the 
penalties for uncovered sell contracts [8]. (In practice, the 
penalty on "reliable" contracts is so high that a trader must 
satisfy all of them, possibly through an expensive "spot" 
market). 
Example: Consider a problem of trading communication 
bandwidth through unreliable satellite and/or ground trans­
mitter equipment and its channels. Our goal is to find the 
best combination of lease (buy) and sell contracts maximiz­
ing the expected value (profit), by taking into an account a 
probability of equipment failures, flexibility of equipment 
coverage, profits/costs for selling/buying respective con­
tracts and penalties for breaching sell contracts. 

220 
HAUSKRECHT & UPFAL 
UAI2001 
The stochastic contract matching problem represents a 
stochastic planning problem with two decision steps: (1) 
an allocation problem, deciding which contracts to buy and 
sell, and (2) a matching problem, where the decision about 
the best coverage of sell contracts after observing the actual 
failure configuration is made. The problem can be formu­
lated as a two stage stochastic programming problem with 
recourse [4, 1]. While there are efficient techniques to solve 
the deterministic version of the matching problem [13, lJ, 
the stochastic version becomes exponential in the number 
of randomly fluctuating elements. It is this aspect we ad­
dress in our work. 
There has been extensive research in AI in recent years 
on solving stochastic planning problems with large ac­
tion and state spaces and variety of techniques for re­
ducing the complexity (typically exponential in the num­
ber of components) of these problems have been proposed 
[3, 7, 6, 5, 9, 12, 2, 11]. However, all these works assume 
a fixed structure and a fixed parameterization of the plan­
ning problem. The unique aspect of our planning problem 
is that the underlying topology characterizing the problem 
can vary and it is itself subject to random changes and fluc­
tuations (due to failures). The optimal decisions must ac­
count for these effects. 
We focus on and propose efficient heuristic approximation 
techniques to solve the stochastic matching problem. In 
particular, we develop a novel clustering approach. The 
idea of the clustering technique is to reduce the number 
of stochastic configurations to be considered in the opti­
mization by aggregating similar configurations. Ideally we 
would like to get the smallest possible number of clusters 
leading to the best approximation. Computing the opti­
mal clustering is as hard as solving the original problem. 
The clustering approach and associated heuristics we pro­
pose are computationally feasible and lead to lower (upper) 
bound approximations of the optimal solution. The quality 
and computational efficiency of the approach are demon­
strated empirically on experimental data. 
2 
TheModel 
We have two sets of contracts for commodities (products, 
services etc.): 
• Buy contracts - a right to one unit of a service or 
commodity. The contract has a price Rb, and a known 
failure probability. 
• Sell contracts - an obligation to deliver one unit of 
a service or commodity. The contract has a price R', 
and a penalty R! for not satisfying the contract. 
In addition, we have a function defining which buy con­
tracts can satisfy a sell contract (Figure 1). Note that since 
Buy contracts 
Sell contracts 
4 
4 
6 
6 
2 
Figure 1: An example of contract asset matching. Nodes 
corresond to different types of contracts. Links represent 
one-to-one matchings between buy and sell assets covered 
by contracts. Numbers reflect the limits for each type of 
contract. 
each buy contract can cover only one sell contract, exercis­
ing the contracts is equivalent to a matching of buy and sell 
contracts. 
The objective is to find the optimal position (portfolio) of 
contracts (available on the market) while optimizing an ob­
jective function that takes into an account the possibility 
of various failures, and subsequent contract breaches. To 
incorporate uncertainty and possible failures we focus on 
the expected value measure, where we want to find a con­
tract position leading to the optimal expected profits. Other 
more complex measures, e.g. incorporating different risk 
preferences of an investor, are possible as well. 
3 
Formulating the optimization problem 
3.1 
Notation 
Let q be a number of different buy contracts (with possi­
bly different price or buy asset links) and nu be the number 
of contracts of type u. Let k be a number of sell contract 
types and m; the number of such contracts of type i. Both 
buy and sell contracts have price; Rt denotes the price of a 
buy contract of type u, Ri the price of sell contract of type 
i. Ri the penalty we have to pay for not satisfying a sell 
contract i. (The penalty for not satisfying a buy contract is 
0.) The number of contracts of each type we can hold is re­
stricted and satisfies: 0 :::; nu :::; cA for all u = 1, 2, . . . , q 
and 0 :S m; :S q for all i = 1, 2, · · ·, k, where C denotes 
upper limits on the number of buy and sell contracts. En­
forcing 0 lower bound limits ensures that no short-selling 
of contracts can occur. 
3.2 
Deterministic matching problem 
The decision problem consists of two choices. First we se­
lect a combination of buy and sell contracts. Second, after 
observing the actual failure configuration, we decide how 
to match different buy and sell contracts. Here we focus on 

UA12001 
HAUSKRECHT & UPFAL 
221 
the second step and its optimal solution. 
Let S = sr s2 · · · Su · 
· · sq be an observed failure combi­
nation, such that Su 
= 1 if buy contracts u did not fail 
and Su = 0 if they failed. Suppose penalties for breaching 
the contract are expressed in terms of negative rewards, the 
matching problem can be formulated as a linear optimiza­
tion problem: 
subject to constrains: 
q 
2:: 
·i 
m;-
Ju 
u=l 
k 
2:: 
·i 
Sunu-
Ju 
i=l 
·i 
Ju 
> 
0 for all i, 
> 
0 for all u, 
> 
0 for all u, i. 
In this LP, nu represents the number of buy assets of type 
u (n = { n1, n2, nu, · 
· ·nq} ), m; the number of sell con­
tracts of type i (m 
= { mr, m2, · 
· · , m;, · · · mk} ), and j 
is a vector (set) of variables j9 representing the number of 
units of asset to be distributed from u to i along connection 
( u, i) if it exists (the variable j; can be omitted if the con­
nection is not present). Values of n, and m are fixed and 
constants and not subject to optimization. The objective 
function Q essentially attempts to minimize losses by cov­
ering sell contracts with highest penalties. There are two 
sets of constraints. The first set assures that the number of 
buy assets actually matched does not exceed the number of 
sell assets (covered by sell contracts). The second set of 
constraints assures that we distribute only assets available 
on the buy side. 
The above matching problem (with fixed supplies and de­
mands) is a special case of a Hitchcock problem [ 13]. An 
interesting property of the problem is that for integral con­
straints, its basic feasible solutions are integral. 1 
3.3 
Contract portfolio optimization 
Our ultimate goal is to find the combination of nu and m; 
values leading to the best (maximum) expected profits. The 
problem can be formulated as a two stage linear program 
with recourse (see e.g. [1]): 
V 
<= { Es(Q(n, m, S))- nuR7 
+ t. m;(Ri + Ri)} 
1The existence of an integral solution is a consequence of total 
unimodularity property of the matrix defining an LP[l3]. 
subject to 
c> 2: nu ;:: 0 for all u; 
Cf ;:: m; ;:: 0 for all i, 
where Es ( Q(n, m, S)) is the expectation of Q for differ­
ent failure combinations. The two-stage problem can be 
expanded into a linear program of the form: 
v 
{ 
q 
k 
rna": - L nuR? + L m;(Ri + Rn 
n,m,J 
u=l 
i=l 
subject to constraints: 
q 

u=l 
k 
s8 nu - 2: J,v ;:: 0 for all u, v; 
i=l 
j: v > 0 for all u, v, i; 
' 
-
C! 2: nu ;:: 0 for all u; 
C: ;:: m; ;:: 0 for all i, 
where v ranges over all possible combinations of failures 
v 
= 1, 2, · · 
· , r; p(Sv) is a probability of a failure com­
bination v, and all variables in the deterministic matching 
subproblem are also indexed by v. 
A similar LP can be constructed to evaluate a specific buy 
and sell contract position under the assumption of the opti­
mal matching. The difference between the evaluation and 
optimization is that n, mare either variables (optimization) 
or fixed values (evaluation). Note, hovewer, that in terms 
of the number of failure combinations the evaluation task 
is comparable to the optimization. 
The two-stage problem with a recourse (or its expanded 
version) offers a special structure allowing more specific 
optimization techniques to be applied to solve it. The meth­
ods include basic (1-cut) or multicut L-shaped methods 
[14] and inner linearization methods. For a survey of appli­
cable techniques see [1]. While basic feasible solutions of 
the deterministic matching LP with integral constraints are 
integral, the integrality of a two-stage solution remains an 
interesting open issue.2 
The apparent drawback of solving the contract optimiza­
tion problem is the curse of dimensionality; the complexity 
of the LP formulation is in the worst case exponential in 
20ur experiments with two-stage problems always lead to in­
tegral solutions. However, we currently do not have a theoretical 
proof of the property, or a counterexample. 

222 
HAUSKRECHT & UPFAL 
UAI2001 
the number of components that can fail and r = 2q. Note 
that the curse of dimensionality affects also the evaluation 
task in which we want to compute the expected value of a 
fixed set of buy and sell allocations under the optimal after­
failure matching. Thus it is hard to even evaluate a fixed 
allocation. One possibility to alleviate this problem is to as­
sure (via various structural restrictions) that the number of 
failure combinations is small and polynomial. Then the ex­
act solution can be obtained efficiently. Another possibility 
is to apply various heuristics leading to efficient solutions. 
4 
Greedy approaches 
One way to solve the contract optimization problem is to 
apply greedy heuristics in which the solution is constructed 
incrementally such that partial matchings with highest ex­
pectations are preferred and selected first. 
4.0.1 
Painvise greedy 
There are various versions of the greedy algorithm. The 
simplest algorithm checks expected profits for all possible 
buy-sell matchings, orders the matchings and builds the so­
lution incrementally by selecting contracts corresponding 
to the best remaining buy-sell pair (according to the order­
ing). The expected profit for matching a pair of contracts 
( u, i) is: 
V(u, i) = -R8 + (1- p,.)Ri + p,.Rt 
where p,. is the failure probability of a buy contract u. 
During the solution-building process, the number of buy 
and sell contracts should never exceed capacity constraints. 
The process stops when there are no additional pairs satis­
fying capacity constraints or when expected profits of re­
maining pairs are negative. 
The drawback of the above algorithm is that it does not 
allow diversification. In other words, the algorithm never 
recommends buying two or more buy contracts to cover 
one sell contract and this despite the fact that this choice 
can increase the overall value of the solution. 
4.0.2 
Diversified greedy 
A partial remedy to the above problem is to diversify indi­
vidual sell contracts across different buys. From the view­
point of a sell contract i only, we want to select a subset B7 
of ali buy assets incident on i (denoted B'), leading to the 
best value: 
V(B!, i) = -[ L. RJ + (1- PB! )R: + PB! Ri, 
uEB! 
where PB' is the probability of all buy contracts in B6 fail­
ing. The best subset can be found either through an exhaus­
tive search or by setting up a linear program similar to the 
method 
pairwise 
diversified 
exact 
contracts 
greedy 
greedy 
buy Ĥn) 
(55 0 0 0) 
(5 5 2 5 2) 
(55 4 52) 
sell ( m) 
(2 3 5 0) 
(2 3 52) 
(4 3 4 5) 
Table l: Comparision of buy and sell allocations for two 
greedy methods and the optimal solution. 
original linear program. In both cases the solution is expo­
nential in I B; I· Thus assuming that ma:x; I B; I is small the 
local diversification can be performed exactly. 
Different buy contracts can be used to cover one or more 
sell contracts. To resolve possible conflicts among differ­
ent sell contracts (buy assets are shared) we select greed­
ily the sell contract (and its best buy combination) with the 
highest expected value and allocate the maximum available 
capacity to it. We repeat the allocation process while dy­
namically adjusting capacity constraints and stop when ca­
pacity constraints are saturated or when none of the best 
combinations comes with a positive expected value. 
The new greedy method decreases a chance of not satisfy­
ing a sell contract by using a multiple buy coverage, thus 
improving on the pairwise greedy method. Unfortunately, 
it also ignores the possibility of using one buy contract to 
diversify simultaneously more sell contracts which is one 
the key features of our problem. 
Table I illustrates the 
differences among the two greedy methods and the opti­
mal solution on the problem from Figure 1 with 5 differ­
ent types of buy contracts and 4 types of sell contracts. 
The diversified greedy method chooses multiple different 
buy contracts as compared to the pairwise greedy allowing 
to cover one sell contract with multiple buys. In addition, 
more sell contracts are sold since positive gains can appear 
as a result of diversification and multiple coverage. How­
ever, in the optimal solution a buy contract can be also used 
to diversify many sell contracts, leading to the increase in 
the number of sell contracts. 
5 
Approximation based on clustering 
To improve on the two greedy methods we develop an al­
ternative approach- cluster-based approximation. The idea 
of our cluster-based approximation is to: (1) restrict the 
number of failure configurations r considered in the opti­
mization problem (LP) and (2) approximate the effect of 
all other failure combinations only through configurations 
in the restricted set 
The probability of each configura­
tion in the restricted set is modified accordingly and covers 
all configurations it replaced. 
A set of failure combina­
tions substituted by the same representative configuration 
is called a cluster; the configuration representing a cluster 
is a cluster seed. 
The actual profits for a specific contract position depend on 

UAI2001 
HAUSKRECHT & UPFAL 
223 
the number of failures that occurred. In general, more fail­
ures reduce our ability to satisfy sell contracts and thus tend 
to decrease the profits when compared to the situation with 
less failures. By disregarding some of the failure combina­
tions and substituting them with combinations with more 
failures one obtains a lower bound estimate of the expected 
value of a given portfolio of contracts. Thus, clustering fail­
ures such that combinations are only replaced with combi­
nations with more failures leads to a lower bound approx­
imation. Small (polynomial) number of such clusters con­
sidered in evaluation (optimization) then leads to a poly­
nomial lower bound solution. Analogously, by substituting 
failure combination with configurations with smaller num­
ber of failures one obtains an efficient upper bound solution 
estimate. This is the key idea of our approach. 
To fully develop the clustering idea we need to: 
1. define a clustering method that for a given set of seed 
failure combinations leads to a lower (upper) bound 
estimate of the optimal expected value; 
2. compute a probability distribution of these clusters; 
3. choose (build) a combination of cluster seeds defining 
the approximation. 
5.1 
Upper and lower bound clustering 
Let S = 8182 · 
· 
· 8q denotes a specific failure combination, 
such that 8,. 
= 0 if buy contracts u failed and 8,. 
= 1 
otherwise. 
Definition 1 Let 51 and 52 be two failure combinations. 
We say that S1 failure-dominates S2 if sĢ = 0 whenever 
s5 = 0 holds. We say that 51 non-failure-dominates 52 
when sģ = 1 holds whenever s; = 1. 
It is easy to see that failure and non-failure dominance are 
closely related: a configuration A failure-dominates B, iff 
B non-failure dominates A. 
To guarantee a lower bound estimate of the expected value 
we substitute a specific failure combination only with a 
failure combination that failure-dominates it. Analogously, 
to obtain an upper bound estimate a failure combination 
can be substituted only by a failure combination that non­
failure-dominates it. Other substitutions may violate the 
bounds. To assure the whole configuration space is always 
covered, our cluster set always includes all-fail and all-no­
fail combinations. 
In essence, a clustering partitions the space of failure con­
figurations. The number of possible partitionings is expo­
nential. In this work, we develop a special form of cluster­
ings that are defined in terms of the seed set orderings. The 
advantage of the clustering is that it reflects the symmetry 
of failure and non-failure dominance and it can be used to 
obtain both bounds. 
Definition 2 A clustering is defined by a .fixed ordering of 
seed configurations W = {St , S2, · 
· 
· 5r }, such that S1 
is the all-no-fail combination, Sr is the all-fail combina­
tion, and for all pairs S;, Sj s.t. i < j, holds that S; does 
not failure dominate 5j. In the lower bound clustering, a 
configuration belongs to the first cluster (seed) that failure­
dominates it, startingfrom S1. In the upper bound clus­
tering, a configuration belongs to the first cluster that non­
failure dominates it, startingfrom Sr and checking seeds in 
W in the reverse order. 
5.2 
Computing probabilities of clusters 
Once the clustering is known, the next step is to compute 
the probability mass of each cluster. Here, we assume the 
lower bound clustering, the upper bound is a dual problem. 
Let W = S 1 , S2, · 
· 
· Sr be an ordered set of seeds defining 
the clustering and let n 1 denotes a failure overlap operator, 
S' = S; nf Sk, such that for all u = 1, · · 
· q holds: 
s -
u 
" 
, { 0 
if 8i 
= sk = 0 
" -
1 
otherwise 
Then the probability of a cluster cl ( Sj) is by the inclusion­
exclusion sum: 
j-1 
p(cl(Sj)) 
p(fds(SJ )) - L:p(fds(SJ n1 5;)) 
(1) 
j-2 j-1 
+ 2::: 2::: p(fds(Si n1 S; n1 Sk))- . . . 
i=l k=i+l 
fds(5) is a set of all configurations failure-dominated 
by a configuration S and p(fds(S)) its probability mass. 
p(fds(S)) equals the marginal probability of all non-failed 
buy contracts in the configuration. For independent failures 
it equals: 
p(fds(S)) = [g(1- p,.J] , 
where un ranges over all buy contracts that did not failed 
in S. 
To obtain the probability of a cluster cl(Sj) for W 
(equation I) we modify p( fds( Sj)) by substracting the 
probability mass already captured by other cluster seeds 
St, S2, · · · , Si -1· This assures that the probability of any 
failure combination is not counted twice. 
5.2.1 
Approximations of cluster probabilities 
The equation 1 gives us a recipe to compute the probabil­
ity distribution of a given set of clusters consistent with 
a lower bound approximation. However, in order to ob­
tain efficient approximation this computation must be ef­
ficient. Assuming all marginal probabilities are efficiently 

224 
HAUSKRECHT & UPFAL 
UA12001 
computable, the inclusion-exclusion (IE) which requires to 
evaluate all possible configuration overlaps represents the 
main difficulty. 
To resolve this problem we compute upper and lower bound 
estimates of cluster probabilities using standard approxi­
mations of the IE problem. The solution is to consider only 
a limited number of intersections, such that we end with 
a negative sign correction to assure a lower bound and a 
positive sign to obtain an upper bound. Let p( cl( Sj)) :S 
p( cl(Sj)) be a lower bound probability of a cluster cl( Sj) 
(for W), obtained via IE approximation. As every cluster 
includes at least its seed, its probability mass can be lower 
bounded by: 
p' (cl(Sj)) = max[p(Sj ); p( ci(SJ ))] , 
where p(Sj) is the joint probability of a configuration Sj. 
To assure that probabilities of all clusters sum to one, we 
add all unaccounted probability mass (can appear due to 
the approximation of the IE problem) to the cluster seeded 
by all-fail combination (Sr configuration). That is: 
r-1 
p'(Sr) = 1- I:.>'(cl(Sj)). 
j=l 
An alternative to inclusion-exclusion approach is to esti­
mate cluster probabilities directly using Monte-Carlo tech­
niques. Note that this approach can be more convenient 
also in the case when marginal probabilities needed for IE 
approximations are hard to compute. 
5.3 
Finding good clusterings 
The last challenge is to devise techniques for finding a clus­
tering leading to a good approximation of the optimal so­
lution. This problem consists of two closely related sub­
problems: (I) finding the best clustering (the best order) 
of a fixed set of seed points, and (2) choosing the set of 
seed points defining the approximation. In general, it is 
hard to solve any of these from scratch in one-shot. Thus 
instead, we focus on incremental methods improving clus­
terings gradually, while exploiting the previously built ap­
proximation. 
5.4 
Best seed ordering 
Let A be a set of seed points. A clustering is defined by an 
ordering W of seed points in A (definition 2) and divides 
(clusters) the space of all failure configurations. As pointed 
out earlier, there can be different orderings of elements in A 
and in the worst case the number is exponential. In general, 
the solutions (allocations of m, n) corresponding to differ­
ent orderings may be different. However, despite this fact, 
it is very often possible to improve the ordering of seeds 
by examining Q-values of a two-stage linear program. This 
idea is captured in the following theorem. 
Theorem 1 Let S; and Sj be two seeds in W such that 
i 
< j. 
Let vw be the optimal value for W. 
If 
Qw(mw,nw,S;) < Qw(mw,nw,Sj), then there is 
an ordering W' such that Sj preceeds S; in this ordering 
and vw' > vw. 
Proof Let S;J 
= S; n1 SJ be a failure overlap of 
S; and Sj. For the ordering W the probability mass 
of S;J can belong (may be in part) to S;; it never be­
longs to Sj. Given the fact that m w, n w are the opti­
mal allocations for W, such that Q w ( m w, n W, S;) < 
Qw (m w, n w, Sj ) , assigning the probability mass of the 
overlap to Sj (for the same allocation m w, n w) must 
lead to a better expected value. Note that the condition 
Qw(mw, nw,S;) < Qw (mw, nw, Sj) implies that SJ 
does not failure-dominateS; (if it would, the Q value of Sj 
cannot be larger), thus the new ordering exists and is valid. 
0 
The theorem gives rise to a simple but very effective itera­
tive improvement procedure for a set of seed points A: se­
lect an initial seed ordering, solve the approximation prob­
lem, compute Q values for every seed, sort them accord­
ing to Q-values, and solve the problem repeatedly until no 
changes in the seed order are observed. Note that sorting 
seed points according to their Q-values works also for the 
upper bound case. Intuitively, in the upper bound case we 
want to find the clustering that leads to the smallest (tight­
est) upper bound. As upper bounds use the reverse ordering 
of W, sorting the seeds according to their Q-values guar­
antees to improve also the upper bound. 
Although the above iterative procedure may not lead to 
the globally optimal clustering it always guarantees an im­
provement and is easy to implement. To search for the 
globally optimal solution, combinatorial optimization tech­
niques such as Metropolis algorithm [10] allowing to scan a 
space of seed orderings can be combined with the heuristic. 
5.5 
Selecting cluster seeds 
Our ultimate goal is to approximate the optimal solution. 
As it is hard to guess a good set of cluster seeds in one step, 
we focus on the incremental approach in which we improve 
the approximation by gradually refining the cluster set. 
Intuitively, both cluster probabilities and Q-values of clus­
ter seeds influence the expectation and thus heuristics 
should reflect both. To capture the effect of probabilities 
we use the following heuristic: to add a new seed, we 
first choose the cluster with the largest probabilistic mass 
not accounted for by the seed configuration itself, and af­
ter that we choose a configuration from within the cluster 
randomly (according to the probability distribution). Let 
p( ci(Si)) be a probability of a cluster defined by a seed S; 
or its estimate and p(S;) the probability of a seed config­
uration itself. Then we define the value of a cluster cl(S;) 

UAI2001 
HAUSKRECHT & UPFAL 
225 
Buy contracts 
Sell contracts 
10 
15 
18 
16 
12 
Figure 2: Admissible matching for the problem with 6 buy 
and 4 sell contract types used in experiments. 
Numbers 
indicate capacity limits for each contract type. 
as: H(cl(S;)) = p(cl(S;)) - p(S;). The heuristic selects 
the cluster with the highest value of H, thus splitting the 
cluster with the largest potential to improve the approxima­
tion. 
To incorporate the effect of Q-values we apply the reorder­
ing heuristics (seeds are sorted according to the Q-values 
for the last s_eeds set) after every step. The objective of is to 
improve the clustering by considering a newly added seed 
and its Q-value. 
5.6 
Experiments 
We have tested the incremental strategy together with the 
two heuristic refinements on a problem with 6 buy sites 
and 4 sell sites. 
Figure 2 shows all admissible match­
ings between buy and sell contracts. 
Figure 3 plots val­
ues of lower bound approximations obtained by gradually 
increasing the number of clusters. Averages of 10 trials 
are shown for each combination of methods. As the values 
represent lower bounds, a higher value indicates better ap­
proximation. For comparison, we also plot expected values 
for the optimal allocation and allocations for the diversified 
and pairwise greedy methods. The best performance was 
obtained by the combination of the two heuristics - proba­
bility based seed selection and reclustering (reordering of 
seeds) based on Q-values. On the other hand, the worst per­
forming method selects new seed configurations uniformly 
at random, with no reclustering. The other two choices, 
came in between, with probability-based heuristics edging 
the reclustering. 
Figure 4 shows the average running times of approxima­
tions for different number of clusters. 
The only signifi­
cant difference between the methods we observed is due 
to reclustering heuristics which reevaluates the cluster seed 
order and improves the seed ordering locally (for each clus­
ter size). The two curves shown average the running times 
of methods with and without reclustering (reordering of 
seeds). To solve a two stage LP problem we use the VNI 
\ 
"' 
0 s. 
"E 
t; 
4 
Quality of approximations 
100,----,---,-----.---.-- 
random select (no reorder) --
random select (reorder) 
·•······• 
prob. select (no reorder) ......... .. 
80 
prob. select (reorder) .............. .. 
........ . 2E!!!!lļL.. ........................................... _ _  ...
.
.
..
.
...
.
.
..
..
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
. . 
60 
20 
10 
15 
20 
number of clusters 
--]-'-
25 
30 
Figure 3: Average (lower) bound values (over 10 trials) and 
different seed selection and clustering methods. Horizontal 
lines show the optimal expected value and expected values 
for the diversified and pairwise greedy methods. 
linear programming package. In contrast to cluster approx­
imations the optimal solution was obtained in 352 min­
utes. 
Thus, using the combinations of our heuristics we 
were able to obtain approximations very close to the opti­
mal value in a significantly shorter time. 
Although cluster-based approximations allow us to grad­
ually improve the bound, ultimately, we are interested in 
finding the optimal assignment ofn, m. Note that in such a 
case the optimal allocation may be obtained well before the 
value of a cluster-based approximation reaches the optimal 
value. Evaluating our experimental results in terms of allo­
cations, we were able to find the optimal allocation in all l 0 
trials (considering up to 30 clusters) with the combination 
of two heuristics. Average number of clusters used to reach 
the optimal allocation was 22. Other methods missed the 
optimal allocations at least once. Random selection method 
with no reorder missed it in all trials. 
6 
Conclusions 
Solving stochastic progranuning problems related to con­
tract matching optimally requires to evaluate explicily ev­
ery possible combination of random variable values. To 
eliminate this dependency we focused on efficient heuristic 
approximations, in particular, a new clustering approach. 
Our primary contributions in this work include: a seed set 
clustering approach leading to upper and lower bound value 
estimates, and heuristics for finding good cluster-based ap­
proximations. The ability of our approach to solve suc­
cesfully hard contract matching problems was illustrated 
experimentally. 
A number of new challenging research issues and questions 
emerge with our problem and need to be investigated; so-

226 
HAUSKRECHT & UPFAL 
UAI2001 
A vcrage running times 
500 
no reorder --
i 
450 
reorder ·········· 
/ 
400 
I 
350 
/ 
I 
300 
// 
250 
..... Z .. · 
.ġ 
I 
200 
/ 
150 
, .... . 
/ 
100 
/ 
50 
...
.
.......... [······
·
· .... 
0 
0 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
number of clusters 
Figure 4: Average running times of approximations for dif­
ferent number of clusters. 
lutions or insights to some of them may further improve 
our current solutions. For example, at present our heuris­
tics looks only at estimates of values and does not take any 
advantage of allocations obtained through upper and lower 
bound clusterings. The interesting question in this respect 
is whether there is any theory allowing us to detect por­
tions of the optimal solution by examining upper and lower 
bound allocations, and whether there is a way to reduce the 
complexity of a problem by removing partial allocations 
known to be optimal.
