ReVoLT: Relational Reasoning and Voronoi Local Graph Planning
for Target-driven Navigation
Junjia Liu13, Jianfei Guo23, Zehui Meng3, Jingtao Xue3
1 Department of Mechanical and Automation Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2 School of Automation Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3 Application Innovate Laboratory (2012 Laboratories), Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
Beijing, 100038, China

Abstract—Embodied AI is an inevitable trend that emphasizes
the interaction between intelligent entities and the real world,
with broad applications in Robotics, especially target-driven
navigation. This task requires the robot to ﬁnd an object of a
certain category efﬁciently in an unknown domestic environment.
Recent works focus on exploiting layout relationships by graph
neural networks (GNNs). However, most of them obtain robot
actions directly from observations in an end-to-end manner
via an incomplete relation graph, which is not interpretable
and reliable. We decouple this task and propose ReVoLT, a
hierarchical framework: (a) an object detection visual front-
end, (b) a high-level reasoner (infers semantic sub-goals), (c) an
intermediate-level planner (computes geometrical positions), and
(d) a low-level controller (executes actions). ReVoLT operates with
a multi-layer semantic-spatial topological graph. The reasoner
uses multiform structured relations as priors, which are obtained
from combinatorial relation extraction networks composed of
unsupervised GraphSAGE, GCN, and GraphRNN-based Region
Rollout. The reasoner performs with Upper Conﬁdence Bound
for Tree (UCT) to infer semantic sub-goals, accounting for
trade-offs between exploitation (depth-ﬁrst searching) and ex-
ploration (regretting). The lightweight intermediate-level planner
generates instantaneous spatial sub-goal locations via an online
constructed Voronoi local graph. The simulation experiments
demonstrate that our framework achieves better performance in
the target-driven navigation tasks and generalizes well, which
has an 80% improvement compared to the existing state-of-
the-art method. The code and result video will be released at
https://ventusff.github.io/ReVoLT-website/.
Index Terms—Relational reasoning, combinatorial relation
graph neural networks, UCT bandit, online Voronoi local graph
I. INTRODUCTION
Finding objects in complex houses efﬁciently is a prereq-
uisite for domestic service robots. Robots need to reason and
make dynamic decisions along with interacting with the real-
world environment. Embodied AI, proposed by Matej Hoffman
and Rolf Pﬁefer [1], suggests that to truly understand how
the human brain works, a brain should be embedded into
a physical body, and let it explore and interact with the
real world. Among all the work practicing Embodied AI in
recent years, target-driven navigation (TDN) is one of the most
feasible and essential tasks, which combines techniques in both
machine learning and robotics, and is widely applicable for
scenarios such as domestic service robots. It typically requires
the robot to ﬁnd a target object of a certain category in an
unknown scene, demanding both high efﬁciency and success
rate. Hence, the key problems of the TDN task are generalizing
across unknown domains and exploring efﬁciently.
Traditional
Simultaneous
Localization
and
Mapping
(SLAM)
pipeline
has
already
handled
TDN
to
some
extent [2], but there are still numerous problems lying
in its major modules. First, it remains troublesome for
SLAM-based methods to acquire and maintain a lifelong
updating semantic map, which demands accurate sensors and
semantic information. Second, SLAM-based methods are
inherently less adaptive to posterior information, which causes
them not generalizing well in complicated environments,
especially in indoor scenes. Last but not least, SLAM-based
methods are not specially designed for searching objects
in unknown environments, which requires keeping balance
between exploitation (depth-ﬁrst searching) and exploration
(regretting).
Recently, learning-based methods emerge and show power-
ful capabilities of solving complicated tasks. However, these
methods generally have problems of interpretability and gen-
eralization, especially in the TDN task which require robots to
operate in unseen domain. We argue that it is more natural
and empirical to introduce a priori [3] [4] to the learning
model instead of training from scratch, considering how human
teach ignorant babies. Introducing a priori enables algorithms
to achieve higher data efﬁciency, better model interpretability,
and generalization. In indoor TDN tasks, one of the most
useful prior information is the relationship among objects
and rooms of different categories. Some recent works reason
about the target direction using object relationships as a
priori in single-room environments [5]–[7]. However, common
domestic scenes are composed of multiple rooms, thus more
prior information such as room connection, object-in-room
membership, and other implicitly structured relationships could
be exploited, which are typically ignored in these works.
In this paper, we propose a hierarchical navigation frame-
work, Relational Reasoning and Voronoi Local graph plan-
ning (ReVoLT), which comprises a combinatorial graph neural
network for multiform domestic relations extraction, an UCT-
based reasoning exploration, and an online Voronoi local graph
for the semantic-spatial transition. The TDN task is concisely
decomposed, allowing for separate and special designs for
different modules, instead of operating in a mixed-up end-to-
end manner. The detailed contributions are as follows:
• To extract multiform structural relations for reasoning, we
propose combining unsupervised GraphSAGE [8], self-
supervised GCN, and c-GraphRNN methods for learning
arXiv:2301.02382v2  [cs.RO]  10 Jan 2023

2EMHFWOHYHO
/RZOHYHO
&RQWUROOHU
5RRP1RGH
2EMHFW1RGH
*KRVW1RGH
&OLTXHOHYHO
9HUWH[OHYHO
&OLTXH1RGH
$
%
$
9RURQRLORFDOJUDSKZLWKUHODWLYHFRRUGLQDWHV
6XEJRDO
5HDFKHG&RXQW
+LJKOHYHO5HDVRQHU
,QWHUPHGLDWHOHYHO3ODQQHU
6LPXODWLRQ
DEVWUDFW
8&7YDOXHV
*UDSKEDVHG8&7
5HODWLYH3RVLWLRQ
RIVXEJRDO
&RPELQDWRULDO,QGXFWLYH
5HODWLRQ([WUDFWLRQ
5HJLRQ(PEHGGLQJ
2EMHFW(PEHGGLQJ
5HJLRQ5ROORXW
2EMHFW
'HWHFWRU
$
$
F
$
$
%
$
$
F
$FWLRQ
Fig. 1. The main hierarchical framework of ReVoLT method, which contains a high-level reasoner (infers semantic sub-goals), an intermediate-level planner
(computes spatial location sub-goal), and a low-level controller (computes actions). The combinatorial relation extraction module provides a priori of the
exploration value about the observed objects and regions through embedding similarity. Especially, Region Rollout model provides Monte Carlo simulation
for UCT in a conditional GraphRNN (c-GraphRNN) way.
object embedding, region embedding, and region rollout,
respectively.
• Based on the relation priors, the high-level reasoner
(semantic reasoning) is abstracted as a bandit problem and
adopts UCT to balance exploitation (depth-ﬁrst searching)
and exploration (regretting).
• Voronoi local graphs are constructed online for converting
semantic sub-goals to spatial locations.
• It is found in the test results that the proposed framework
is superior to state-of-the-art methods and achieves a
higher success rate and success weighted by path length
(SPL) with good generalization.
II. RELATED WORKS
Graph is useful for constructing relationships between non-
Euclidean data, which has recently become popular for rep-
resenting the physical structure of redundant robots to learn
coordination between their multiple degrees of freedom [9],
learning trafﬁc signal co-regulation between multi-junction
networks [10], and representing the state change of deformable
and soft objects. It is also reasonable and natural to use graphs
for relational reasoning to solve TDN problems. They have
the advantage of replacing an explicit metric map like SLAM-
based methods, inferring the approximate position of the target
object based on observed objects. Most of these methods use
GNNs to learn object-object proximity relationships but ignore
the relationship between regions/rooms, thus it limits their task
scenarios to a single room (using AI2Thor data set [11] in
simulation for training). For example, Yang et al. [5] propose
to use Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) to incorporate
the prior knowledge about object relationship into a Deep
Reinforcement Learning (DRL) framework as part of joint
embedding. Their priors are obtained from large-scale scene
understanding datasets and updated according to the current
observation.
For navigation tasks in houses with multiple rooms, it is
necessary to ﬁrst reach the room that may contain the target
object (e.g. refrigerator-kitchen), then search the target in
object cliques. Therefore, the learning of prior knowledge
should consider more relationships, including room-to-room
connection and object-in-room membership. Wu et al. [12]
propose a memory structure based on the Bayesian graph
model. It uses the probability relationship graph to get the prior
house layout from the training set and estimates its posterior
in the test set. However, this work does not combine object-
level reasoning to achieve a complete TDN task. Chaplot
et al. [13] build a topological representation with associated
semantic features and learn a prior semantic score function
to evaluate the probability of potential nodes in a graph with
various directions. However, they provide target images,which
is impractical in domestic scenarios, while our method only
uses target labels. They subsequently extend the Active Neural
SLAM system [2], to learn semantic priors using a semanti-
cally aware long-term policy for label target navigation task
[14] and won CVPR 2020 Habitat ObjectNav Challenge1 [15].
It is worth mentioning that they also point out the end-to-end
learning-based methods suffer from large sample complexity
and poor generalization as they memorize object locations and
appearance in training environments [14], which prompt us to
consider the hierarchical framework with a topological graph.
Table I only lists TDN methods with label target and relational
reasoning.
III. REVOLT REASONING & PLANNING WITH
HIERARCHICAL FRAMEWORK
This task needs to be re-examined from the perspective of
bionics. Imagine a human facing such a task when he enters
an unknown house. He will not feel confused due to the prior
knowledge about domestic scenes he has. It is natural for us to
ﬁrst roughly determine the type of room based on categories
of multiple observed objects in the current room (e.g. a
bedroom). According to the object-in-room membership, the
1https://aihabitat.org/challenge/2020/

8QVXSHUYLVHG:HLJKWHG*UDSK6$*(
F*UDSK511*HQHUDWLRQ
6HOIVXSHUYLVHG
*UDSK&RQYROXWLRQDO1HWZRUN
*&1
3UR[LPLW\6LPLODULW\/RVV
0HPEHUVKLS
6LPLODULW\/RVV
&ODVVLŀFDWLRQ/RVV











"
"
"
"
&RQYROXWLRQDO1HXUDO1HWZRUN/D\HUV
)XOO\&RQQHFWHG/D\HUV
D2EMHFW(PEHGGLQJ
REMHFWWRREMHFWSUR[LPLW\
E5HJLRQ(PEHGGLQJ
REMHFWLQUHJLRQPHPEHUVKLS
F5HJLRQ5ROORXW
UHJLRQWRUHJLRQFRQQHFWLYLW\
&ODVVLŀFDWLRQ/RVV
Fig. 2. Combinatorial relation extraction module. (a) Obtain object embedding via unsupervised weighted-GraphSAGE; (b) Region embedding is received by
passing a sub-graph with object embedding to GCN layers; (c) According to the house structure of region connectivity, a GraphRNN-based model is used to
learn the structure distribution and generate possible feature of future regions node by node.
TABLE I
PERFORMANCE OF EXISTING TDN METHODS WITH
VARIOUS EXPERIMENT SETTING
Method
Room Scale
Dataset
SR(%)
SPL(%)
Scene-prior [5]
Single
AI2-THOR
35.4
10.9
SAVN [16]
Single
AI2-THOR
35.7
9.3
MJOLNIR [7]
Single
AI2-THOR
65.3
21.1
BRM [12]
Multiple
House3D
-
-
SemExp† [14]
Multiple
Matterport3D
36.0
14.4
† SemExp won the ﬁrst place in CVPR Habitat 2020 competition.
exploration value V(t|cur room) of the target object t in
the current room can be obtained. At the same time, some
potential but unexplored passages (e.g. a door or hallway)
can be determined as ghost nodes like [13]. The structural
relationship of the house layout and room connection can help
us predict categories and value V(t|next room) of next rooms
connected by ghost nodes.
Except for these priors, dynamic decisions also should be
made in a speciﬁc task, rather than just applying experience
mechanically. Reasoning procedure which contains intelligent
exploration and exploitation is one of the winning strategies.
Thus, our approach focuses on solving the following two
problems:
• How to obtain a more effective prior conditional explo-
ration value in a structured form?
• How to make efﬁcient decisions between multiple feasible
paths based on exploration values?
The remainder of this section is organized as follows. In
subsection III-A, III-B, III-C, we present a combinatorial
relation extraction module (Fig. 2) using GNNs, which learns
three different relationships in a uniﬁed paradigm. A UCT-
based online reasoner is described in subsection III-D. In
III-E, we consider the coarse spatial information and build
an intermediate-level planner through online Voronoi construc-
tion. Finally, the whole ReVoLT hierarchical framework is
summarized in subsection III-F (Fig. 1).
A. Object Embedding learning
As illustrated in Fig. 2 (a), the object-to-object relationship
consists of not only pair-wise semantic similarity, but also
distances and the number of hops between object pairs. We
ﬁrst extract an object-level graph Go(Vo, Eo) through object
positions pos and category Co from Matterport3D dataset.
Objects in the same room are fully connected. As for object
pairs in different rooms, only those closest to a common door
have an connecting edge. This is useful for the robot to infer
objects that are strongly related to the target just using object-
level embedding.
GraphSAGE [8] is a popular model in the node embedding
ﬁeld. We adopt it to obtain the embedding of each object
category to fuse semantics and proximity relationships with
other categories. Our node embedding procedure uses GloVe
[17] as the initial node semantic feature {xv, ∀v ∈Vo}, and
employ an unsupervised form of GraphSAGE with a loss that
penalizes the embedding similarity between two objects far
apart and reward the adjacent two. Different from the original
GraphSAGE, edge features {ωe:u→v, ∀e ∈Eo} are also taken
into account in aggregation and loss calculations. For each
search depth k, weight matrices Wk, ∀k ∈{1, . . . , K}, we
employ an edge-weighted mean aggregator which simply takes
the element-wise mean of the vectors in {hk−1
u
, ∀u ∈N(v)}
to aggregate information from node neighbors:
h0
v ←xv, ∀v ∈V
hk
v ←σ
 Wk · mean({hk−1
v
} ∪{ωu→v · hk−1
u
})

(1)
Then an edge-weighted loss function is applied to the output
{zv, ∀v ∈Vo}, and tune the weight matrices Wk:
LGo (zv) = −log
 σ
 ωu→vz⊤
v zu

−Q · Eun∼Pn(v) log
 σ
 −ωu→vz⊤
v zun

(2)

where Pn is a negative sampling distribution, Q deﬁnes the
number of negative samples, σ is the sigmoid function.
Since object embeddings with the same category {zc, ∀c ∈
Co} should have consistent representation, another mean ag-
gregation is performed on the embeddings of same category
between the ﬁnal GraphSAGE aggregation and loss function.
This overwrites the original value with the ﬁnal embedding for
each category {zc ←mean(hK
v ), if Co(v) = c}.
B. Region Embedding learning
Apart from the pairwise relationship between objects, the
many-to-one relationship between an object and a room or
region is also indispensable for inferring the existence pos-
sibility of the target object in a certain room or among
multiple observed objects. Besides, to evaluate the similarity,
relationships of different levels should have a uniﬁed paradigm
to obtain representation of consistent metrics. Therefore, for
region-level sub-graphs, we still opt for the same embedding
representation procedure. This part is shown in Fig. 2 (b).
Region embedding is carried out in a self-supervised form.
We take the sub-graph Gr(Vr, Er) as input, with embedding
of objects in the same region {zc, ∀c ∈Co} as nodes and
weighted spatial distances as edges. The batch composed
of these sub-graphs is passed into the GCN [18], and the
corresponding region embedding {rv, ∀v ∈Vr} is obtained.
Similarly from the previous procedure, for region embedding
with the same label, a mean aggregation is performed to obtain
a uniform vector representation {rl, ∀l ∈Lr}. Since there is
no need to do multi-hop aggregations at region-level, a simple
GCN layer is applied rather than GraphSAGE.
To enable membership calculation between region embed-
ding rl and object embedding zc and distinguish regions with
different labels, we use a combined loss which comprises
two parts: the classiﬁcation loss of embedding label and the
membership loss of object-in-region:
LGr (rv) = −log
 σ
 r⊤
v zu

−Q · Eun∼Pn(v) log
 σ
 −r⊤
v zun

−1
n
n
X
i=1
lv log(ˆl(rv))
(3)
where Pn(v) represents objects not in region v, and ˆl(·) is a
multi-layer perceptron (MLP) network.
C. Region Rollout learning
As the third and most important part of relation extraction,
the structural relationship reasoning ability plays a crucial
role in understanding the correct direction of navigation and
shortening the exploration period. To achieve this, the joint
probability p(Gh) of houses need to be learned to conceive a
probable house layout memory Gh ∼p(Gh|Gsub) conditioned
on observed regions Gsub. However, its sample space might not
be easily characterized. Thus, the house graphs are modeled
as sequences by following the idea of GraphRNN [19], and
redeﬁne some concepts to make it more suitable for conditional
reasoning with embedding. This part is shown in Fig. 2 (c).
Sπ = fs(Gh, π) = (Aπ
1, . . . , Aπ
n)
(4)
where π represents the node order, and each element Aπ
i ∈
{0, 1}(i−1)×(i−1), i ∈{1, . . . , n} is an adjacent matrix refer-
ring the edges between node π(vi) and its previous nodes
π(vj), j ∈{1, . . . , i −1} already in the graph.
Since each Aπ
i has variable dimensions, we ﬁrst ﬁll them up
to the maximum dimension n and then repeat the 2D matrix
16 times to form a 3D matrix with n × n × 16 dimensions as
an edge mask where 16 is the embedding length. Therefore, a
featured graph can be expressed as the element-wise product
of the region embedding matrix Xπ under corresponding order
and sequence matrix {Sπ}3D:
p(G) =
n+1
Y
i=1
p
 xπ
i | ({Sπ
1 }3D, . . . , {Sπ
i−1}3D) ⊙Xπ
i−1

(5)
where Xπ
i−1 is the embedding matrix with (i −1) × (i −1) ×
16 dimensions referring to region embeddings before region
π(vi), and xπ
i refers to the embedding of π(vi).
Passing {Sπ}3D ⊙Xπ as a sequence into GRU or LSTM,
we can get the structure distribution of houses. This allows
us to predict the next region embedding and label under the
condition of the observed subgraph. The loss function of the
Region Rollout network is a CrossEntropy between generated
embedding label and the real label:
LGh(xπ
i ) = −1
n
n
X
i=1
li log-softmax[(xπ
i )T rj], ∀j ∈Lr
(6)
In conclusion, with the combination of III-A unsupervised
edge-weighted GraphSAGE object embedding learning, III-B
self-supervised GCN region embedding learning, and III-C
c-GraphRNN conditional region rollout, we can now extract
multiform structural relationships. Meanwhile, embedding is
used as a uniﬁed paradigm for representation, and the similar-
ity between objects or regions (either observed or predicted)
embeddings and the target object embedding is used as a prior
to guide the exploration in an unknown domain.
D. Reasoning and Exploring as a Bandit Problem
A prior alone cannot lead to success. Inspired by [13], a
posterior topological representation is also constructed in each
speciﬁc task to combine experience with practice. Speciﬁcally,
we build a multi-layer posterior topological graph covering all
object-level, clique-level and vertex-level. clique divides rooms
into small clustered regions and reduces the burden of the
visual front-end. Each vertex governs the three nearest cliques.
Object Embedding network provides the object node features,
and Region Embedding network generates the features of both
clique and vertex from their attached objects. Region Rollout
network gives an evaluation about ghost nodes. However, there
are always situations contrary to experience in reality. In other
words, robots must have the ability to balance exploration and
exploitation online.
We adopt Upper Conﬁdence Bound for Tree (UCT) method
[20] to set an online bonus. The simulation procedure of UCT
is supported by the Region Rollout network, thus the robot
is not only able to obtain the bonus from reached count, but
also estimate the future exploration value inductive bias ωi of
selected path. It can effectively prevent the robot from being

2EMHFWOHYHO
5RRP1RGH
2EMHFW1RGH
*KRVW1RGH
&OLTXHOHYHO
9HUWH[OHYHO
&OLTXH1RGH
$
%
$
+LJKOHYHO5HDVRQHU
6LPXODWLRQ
DEVWUDFW
8&7YDOXHV
*UDSKEDVHG8&7
&RPELQDWRULDO,QGXFWLYH
5HODWLRQ([WUDFWLRQ
5HJLRQ(PEHGGLQJ
2EMHFW(PEHGGLQJ
1RGH5ROORXW
2EMHFW
'HWHFWRU
$
$
F
Fig. 3. In a speciﬁc task, a multi-layer topological graph is constructed based
on visual front-end, and a tree with the birthplace as the root node is abstracted
from the graph. The clique refers to a collection of adjacent objects or a bunch
of non-semantic obstacles, and the vertex refers to an observed navigable
location. Each gray ghost node has connected two vertices, and only stores
the relative position of the connected vertices to assist localization, without
being used as a navigation sub-goal. The black ghost nodes refer to unknown
areas and promote exploration.
trapped in a useless area. The combined effect of inductive bias
ω and bonus will discourage the repetitive search near negative
(non-success) sub-goals and drive the robot to return to parent
nodes for back-tracking, which we term Revolt Reasoning.
The word Revolt summarizes the characteristics of our method
vividly, which allows robots to regret at nodes with low
exploration value, discarding them and returning to previous
paths. To avoid robots wandering between two goals, it is
necessary to introduce a navigation loss term Ldis to penalize
node distances. Hence, we can ﬁnally obtain the exploration
value V of the node i as:
V(t|i) = Σm
i→jωj
m
+ c1
r
ln Ni
ni
−c2Ldis
(7)
where factors c1 and c2 are set as 1 and 0.5. j refers to one
of node i’s descendants in the tree, and m is its total number.
Ni is the total arrivals of node i and its descendants, while ni
just represents arrivals of node i.
E. Online constructed Voronoi local graph
The reasoner only gives a semantic node id in a graph as
a sub-goal. If the low-level controller directly uses it as a
navigation goal, it will inevitably lead to over-coupling and
increase the difﬁculty of navigation success. We can refer to
the hierarchical human central nervous system composed of
the brain, cerebellum, brain-stem and spinal cord [21], if the
high-level reasoner is compared to the brain, then the skeletal
muscle is the low-level motor controller. The brain does not
directly transmit motion instructions to the skeletal muscles,
but passes it through the brain-stem, spinal cord and other
lower-level central nervous system for information conversion
[22]. Besides, the brain does not actually support high-speed,
low-latency information interaction while controlling a motion
[23]. Therefore, it is necessary to use a RGB-D camera and
an odometer to construct a local Voronoi graph, offering
approximate relative coordinates of the sub-goal within a
Fig. 4. Combining the depth information with robot’s pose in a short period,
then we can get a simple 3D reconstruction result. A Voronoi local graph can
be constructed through DBSCAN clustering after projecting the 3D map as a
2D obstacle scatter plot.
reachable range as an input to the low-level controller. The
Voronoi graph can record the relationship between the robot
and obstacles, and provide an available path. Since the TDN
task is map-less, we construct a local Voronoi graph within a
ﬁxed step online.
Conditioning on the depth information, the parameters (in-
ternal and external) of the camera, and the odometer infor-
mation, obstacles in depth images can be easily converted
into coordinates in a world coordinate system. This system
is derived from the birth pose of the robot. Projecting this
partially reconstructed 3D map onto a 2D plane along the
vertical axis forms a scatter diagram depicting obstacles. We
can construct a Voronoi diagram online by segmenting naviga-
ble paths and explorable cliques with multiple related objects.
Different from traditional methods [24], we use DBSCAN
[25], [26] (a density-based clustering algorithm) to cluster
the scattered points of adjacent obstacles into convex hulls
ﬁrst, and then ﬁlter out noise points. Followed by constructing
Delaunay triangle with the center of scattered points in the
convex hull, thereby generating a Voronoi diagram.

2EMHFWOHYHO
/RZOHYHO
&RQWUROOHU
&OLTXHOHYHO
9HUWH[OHYHO
$
%
$
6XEJRDO
5HDFKHG&RXQW
+LJKOHYHO5HDVRQHU
0LGGOHOHYHO3ODQQHU
$
$
%
6LPXODWLRQ
DEVWUDFW
8&7YDOXHV
*UDSKEDVHG8&7
5HODWLYH3RVLWLRQ
RIVXEJRDO
$
$
$
$
F
F
2EMHFW1RGH
*KRVW1RGH
5RRP1RGH
&OLTXH1RGH
9RURQRLORFDOJUDSKZLWKUHODWLYHFRRUGLQDWHV
9
L O
O
K
LWK
O WL
GL
W
Fig. 5.
The semantic sub-goal is converted into relative coordinates by the
Voronoi-based intermediate-level planner.
F. Hierarchical reasoning and planning for navigation
In this section, we will summarize how the proposed rea-
soner and planner cooperate to complete navigation tasks. The
curves in Fig. 5 show the correspondence of concepts between
the topological graph in reasoner and the Voronoi diagram
in planner. The aggregation of obstacles is regarded as a
clique, each of which attaches and records all objects in its
convex hull, and evaluates its inductive bias value according
to the object-in-region membership via the Region Embedding
network. The position of a vertex is generated by Voronoi.
Multiple cliques and their subordinate objects surrounding the
vertex jointly determine the general room label of it, and use
the label for the inductive bias evaluation. Relative directions
and distances between two adjacent vertex nodes are stored in
gray ghost nodes. Since the robot exploits relative coordinates
and directions, it effectively avoids the inﬂuence of odometer
and depth camera error, thus insensitive to cumulative error.
Besides, thanks to the Voronoi local diagram, only short-period
scatter data need to be saved, and there is no need to consider
the closed-loop matching problem like SLAM.
With the construction of Voronoi diagram and its trans-
formation to a hierarchical topology, we can conduct rea-
soning in vertex/clique-level and object-level, searching for
the best vertex position and the most likely clique based on
the exploration value. After selecting a clique, the robot will
navigate towards it, and explore it more explicitly as object-
level reasoning. Besides, the Voronoi diagram provides the
evidence for choosing the next best view of one clique. By
changing multiple perspectives, the robot can ﬁnd the target
object in a clique more efﬁciently.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
A. Experiment Setup
We use the Habitat simulator [27] with Matterport3D [28]
environment as our experiment platform. Habitat simulator is
a 3D simulator with conﬁgurable agents, multiple sensors, and
generic 3D dataset handling. Matterport3D dataset contains 90
houses with 40 categories of objects and 31 labels of regions.
It also provides detailed object and region segmentation infor-
mation. Here we just focus on 21 categories of target object
required by the task: chair, table, picture, cabinet, cushion,
sofa, bed, chest of drawers, plant, sink, toilet, stool, towel, tv
monitor, shower, bathtub, counter, ﬁreplace, gym equipment,
seating, clothes and also ignore some meaningless room labels,
like outdoor, no label, other room and empty room. We use
YOLOv4 [29] as our object detection module, which is ﬁne-
tuned using objects in Matterport3D dataset. Because the
aiming of low-level controller is the same as PointNav task’s
[30], we adapt a pre-trained state-of-the-art PointNav method
occupancy anticipation [31] as our controller.
During a speciﬁc TDN task, the robot is spawned at a
random location in a certain house and is demanded to ﬁnd a
object of a given category as quickly as possible. The task
is evaluated with three commonly used indicators: Success
Rate (SR), the Success weighted by Path Length (SPL)
and Distance to Success (DTS). SR represents the number of
times the target was found in multiple episodes and is deﬁned
as
1
N
PN
i=1 Sui, where N is the number of total episodes and
Sui is a binary value representing the success or failure of the
i-th episode. SPL depicts both success and the optimal path
length, it is deﬁned as
1
N
PN
i=1 Si
Li
max(Pi,Li). Here we use the
shortest length provided by the simulator as Li and the path
length of the robot as Pi in episode i. DTS is the distance
of the agent from the success threshold boundary when the
episode ends. The boundary is set to 1m and the maximum
episode length is 500 steps, which are the same as [14].
Furthermore, our navigation task has two modes: indepen-
dent (ReVoLT-i) and continuous (ReVoLT-c). Independent mode
is the traditional one, the environment is reset after each
episode and the robot clears its memory. While the continuous
mode allows the robot to keep the topological graph if it
resets in the same house. It is used for evaluating the robot’s
capability of keeping and updating the environment memory.
B. Baselines
Random: At each step, the agent randomly samples an
action from the action space with a uniform distribution.
RGBD + DD-PPO: This baseline is provided by ObjectNav
Challenge 2020 [27]. Directly pass RGB-D information to an
end-to-end DD-PPO and output an action from the policy.
Active Neural SLAM: This baseline uses an exploration
policy trained to maximize coverage from [2], followed by the
heuristic-based local policy as described above.
SemExp: Since [14] has not open-sourced their code, we
directly use results in their paper as a state-of-the-art method.
C. Results
1) results of combinatorial relation embeddings: The Ob-
ject Embedding network obtains classiﬁcation accuracy of
91%. The Region Embedding network obtains membership
accuracy of 78% and classiﬁcation accuracy of 75%. The
Region Rollout network reaches prediction accuracy of 45%
in the test set, which is acceptable since room relationships
are not signiﬁcant inherently.
2) results of the whole TDN task: The results of baseline
methods and ReVoLT is shown in Table II. It can be seen
that both of our models signiﬁcantly outperform the current
state-of-the-art. ReVoLT-i small has ≈80% increase in SR
and nearly twice than SemExp in SPL. This conﬁrms our
hypothesis that separating prior learning and control policy in a
hierarchical framework is indeed a wise approach than directly

VWHSV
VWHSV
VWHSV
VWHSV
VXFFHVV
VXFFHVV
VXFFHVV
VXFFHVV
Fig. 6.
Top-down maps of four successful tasks while using ReVoLT-i.
The blue squares are the beginning positions, the blue curves are the robot
trajectories, and arrows represent the robot’s current positions. Targets are
highlighted with green boxes, and pink areas refer to the success threshold
boundary. The color of the trajectory is a gradient from dark to light, and the
brighter the end indicates the longer the path.
TABLE II
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON
Method
SR(%)
SPL
DTS (m)
Random
0
0
10.3298
RGBD + DD-PPO
6.2
0.021
9.3162
Active Neural SLAM
32.1
0.119
7.056
SemExp1
36.0
0.144
6.733
ReVoLT-i small∗
66.7
0.265
0.9762
ReVoLT-i∗
62.5
0.102
1.0511
ReVoLT-c∗
85.7
0.070
0.0253
1 The 1st prize of AI Habitat 2020
* These three refer to small mode with only 6 categories target like SemExp,
independence mode (-i) and continuous mode (-c) of ReVoLT.
learning a semantically-aware policy. Besides, the standard
ReVoLT-i with 19 categories of targets still achieve a higher SR
and SPL. By applying the continuous mode, the robot retains
a memory belonging to the same house, which allows it to ﬁnd
observed targets with a higher SR.
V. ABLATION STUDY
The success of ReVoLT is attributed to the relationship priors
provided by the combinatorial GNNs, the online bonus by
UCT, and the distance penalty. Therefore, we set three extra
experiments with the same Voronoi-based planner and low-
level controller to reveal their impacts, respectively. Moreover,
the results of the continuous mode are also presented below.
The performance of all varieties is listed in Table III.
ReVoLT w/o relationship priors. Sub-goal in the navigation
without priors can be generated according to the distance of
the observed cliques. Compared to Fig. 7 (a) with Fig. 6, we
ﬁnd that the lack of semantic relationship profoundly affects
the robot’s path decision, making it not interested in the region
with a target even though it is just nearby. Besides, the lack
of region classiﬁcation and region rollout makes the robot
D5H9R/7ZRUHODWLRQVKLSSULRUV
E5H9R/7ZR8&7ERQXV
F5H9R/7ZRGLVWDQFHSHQDOW\
G5H9R/7ZLWKFRQWLQXRXVPRGH
VWHSVIDLO
VWHSV
VWHSVIDLO
VWHSVVXFFHVV
VWHSVVXFFHVV
VWHSVVXFFHVV
VWHSV
VWHSVVXFFHVV
VXFFHVV
VXFFHVV
Fig. 7. In response to the three parts of exploration value function, we conduct
ablation experiments respectively and illustrate them in top-down maps.
TABLE III
PERFORMANCE OF ABLATION EXPERIMENTS
Method
SR(%)
SPL
DTS (m)
ReVoLT-i
62.5
0.102
1.0511
ReVoLT-c
85.7
0.070
0.0253
ReVoLT w/o priors
25.0
0.003
1.4129
ReVoLT w/o bonus
60.0
0.034
0.8139
ReVoLT w/o distance
54.5
0.030
1.2689
unable to use the observed semantic information to reason
about relationships, resulting in longer paths.
ReVoLT w/o UCT bonus. The bonus is replaced with a ﬁxed
threshold. If the robot reaches the same clique or vertex node
more than twice, then this node will no longer be selected as
a sub-goal. The corresponding top-down maps are illustrated

in Fig. 7 (b). Without a UCT bonus, the robot falls into an
impossible local region until the threshold is reached.
ReVoLT w/o distance penalty. In Fig. 7 (c), using only priors
and bonuses can also complete tasks, but their paths are longer
due to the ﬂuctuating thoughts while making decisions.
ReVoLT with continuous mode. The left ﬁgure of Fig. 7 (d)
is the same as the one in Fig. 6. However, when searching
for the second target in this house, once the robot associates
current observations with the memory, it can ﬁnd the target
with a higher success rate. However, this also makes the robot
more focused on exploitation and reduces exploration, which
may cause it to ignore closer targets and lead to a lower SPL.
To sum up, relationship priors are essential for robots to
understand the environment semantics, and it is also the major
factor affecting the SR. The UCT bonus and distance penalty
contribute to the improvement of SPL. ReVoLT-c maintains a
long-term scene memory and can get outstanding performance.
VI. CONCLUSION
We propose ReVoLT, a hierarchical reasoning target-driven
navigation framework that combines combinatorial graph re-
lation extraction and online UCT decision operating with a
multi-layer topological graph. ReVoLT shows better perfor-
mance on exploiting the prior relationships, and its bandit
reasoning is more reasonable and efﬁcient. To bridge the
gap between existing point-goal controllers and our reasoner,
we adopt the Voronoi local graph for the semantic-spatial
transition. However, some signiﬁcant challenges remain in
this ﬁeld. Our future direction lies in using representation
learning techniques to introduce richer object information like
shape, color, and size, using scene graph detection to introduce
richer semantic relation information like furniture layout, and
achieving more abundant tasks like object instance navigation.
