A.Mojtahedi, F.Sorouri, A.N. Souha, A.Molazadeh, S.Shafaei Mehr                                                        Vol. 3, No. 2, 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
 
 
  
 
 
Feature Selection-based Intrusion Detection System Using Genetic Whale 
Optimization Algorithm and Sample-based Classification 
 
Amir Mojtahedi1, Farid Sorouri2, Alireza Najafi Souha2, Aidin Molazadeh3, Saeedeh Shafaei 
Mehr1 
1- Department of Computer Engineering, Moghadas Ardabili Institute of Higher Education, Ardabil, Iran 

2- Department of Computer Engineering, Ardabil Branch, Islamic Azad University, Ardabil, Iran 

3-National Industrial Group, Tehran, Iran 

 
 
 
 
Received 19 Jan 2021 
                                 Revised 18 Feb 2021                                   Accepted 5 May 2021 
 
 
ABSTRACT: 
Preventing and detecting intrusions and attacks on wireless networks has become an important and serious challenge. 
On the other hand, due to the limited resources of wireless nodes, the use of monitoring nodes for permanent monitoring 
in wireless sensor networks in order to prevent and detect intrusion and attacks in this type of network is practically non-
existent. Therefore, the solution to overcome this problem today is the discussion of remote-control systems and has 
become one of the topics of interest in various fields. Remote monitoring of node performance and behavior in wireless 
sensor networks, in addition to detecting malicious nodes within the network, can also predict malicious node behavior 
in future. In present research, a network intrusion detection system using feature selection based on a combination of 
Whale optimization algorithm (WOA) and genetic algorithm (GA) and sample-based classification is proposed. In this 
research, the standard data set KDDCUP1999 has been used in which the characteristics related to healthy nodes and 
types of malicious nodes are stored based on the type of attacks in the network. The proposed method is based on the 
combination of feature selection based on Whale optimization algorithm and genetic algorithm with KNN classification 
in terms of accuracy criteria, has better results than other previous methods. Based on this, it can be said that the Whale 
optimization algorithm and the genetic algorithm have extracted the features related to the class label well, and the KNN 
method has been able to well detect the misconduct nodes in the intrusion detection data set in wireless networks. 
 
KEYWORDS: Intrusion detection system (IDS), Feature subset selection, Whale optimization, Genetic algorithm, 
Sample-based classification. 
 
1.  INTRODUCTION 
Wireless networks, are infrastructure-free networks that 
consist of a set of mobile or fixed hosts that are 
connected to each other via wireless connections. Each 
node can act as a final system; in addition it can send and 
receive bounds in the role of a router [1]. In a wireless 

Future Generation in Distributed Systems Journal 
 
                                       Vol. 3, No. 2, 2021 
 
15 
 
network, two nodes may be connected in one step or in 
several steps. When a source node intends to transfer 
information to a destination node, bounds are transferred 
between intermediate nodes, so it is very important for 
wireless networks to search and quickly create a route 
from source to destination node [2]. The topology of 
mobile wireless networks may change intermittently as 
nodes move, so with these technology nodes can be 
easily moved with local neighbors. Devices used in 
wireless networks may exist in different forms but have 
the same basic activity, i.e., all nodes operate at least to 
some extent independently [3, 2, 4, 5, 6]. 
 Increasing the need to use equipment such as mobile 
phones, etc. has become possible with the advent of 
wireless networks. In the meantime, one of the issues 
that has always been considered is the issue of attacks on 
wireless networks [7]. For example, some servers are 
attacked, causing data to crash and be stolen. In a such 
situation, substantial and irreparable damage will be 
done to the network. When it comes to wireless 
networks, the issue of security and attack prevention 
becomes much more complex, and this problem is far 
more serious in the case of mobile wireless networks [8]. 
Researchers have come up with several ways to solve the 
problem of security in wireless networks. Approaches 
are designed to provide security in routing operations 
and prevent attack threats such as authentication, 
resource restriction, honesty, confidentiality and 
protection of users' privacy [9]. Network intrusion and 
attacks on wireless networks can take many forms: 
bounds loss, routing structure reconstruction, network 
topology deviation, and the creation of fake nodes, are 
types of wireless network attacks [10].  
Various methods have been proposed to provide security 
in wireless networks, but these methods do not have the 
ability to detect more attacks. Penetration of malicious 
nodes between nodes in wireless networks may weaken 
or destroy transmitted data bounds and destroy the entire 
bounds or part of the available data. Therefore, the 
overall performance of the network and system is 
threatened and the results may be interpreted differently 
[11, 12]. Therefore, preventing and detecting intrusions 
and attacks in wireless networks has been considered as 
a fundamental and serious challenge. Thus, network 
intrusion detection systems (NIDS) [13, 11] are very 
effective in ensuring security in wireless networks so 
that these systems are able to cover a wide range of 
attacks [14, 15]. 
 On the other hand, due to the energy limitation in 
wireless nodes [16]especially sensors, the use of 
monitoring equipment such as nodes, for regular 
monitoring of wireless networks [17, 18]in order to 
detect intrusion and prevent attack is practically 
impossible to do [19]. In order to provide solutions to 
this problem, the issue of remote monitoring systems has 
recently become one of the most important issues in the 
field of network security. Remote monitoring of node 
behavior and how data is sent and received over wireless 
networks has the potential to detect intrusion and detect 
attacks on the network. Control systems can also predict 
future attacks on the network by creating patterns of the 
behavior [20, 21]. Of course, by detecting malicious 
nodes, intrusion and attacks in the network can be 
prevented, which can be considered a threat to the 
information transmitted in the network. In addition, 
remote monitoring reduces energy consumption in 
wireless nodes and is more cost-effective [22, 23]. 
 
2. Previous methods 
Intrusion detection systems are an important tool for 
network protection. Intrusion detection systems analyze 
node entry paths in relation to protected systems and 
specify whether these input paths contain attack nodes. 
If the intrusion detection system detects an attack, it 
raises the alert. Traditionally, intrusion detection 
systems use in-depth bound inspections or situational 
protocol analysis to detect attacks in network traffic. In 
2020, Vijayanand et al. Proposed a Wapper-based 
method using the modified Whale Optimization (WOA) 
algorithm. One drawback of WOA is that early 
convergence leads to an optimal local solution. To 
overcome this limitation, this paper proposes a method 
in which genetic algorithm operators are combined with 
WOA. The fit operator has been used to further improve 
the whale search space, and the flow operator has helped 
to avoid getting stuck in the local optimization [6]. The 
proposed method selects informative features in network 
data, which help to accurately detect intrusion. Using 
Support Vector Machine (SVM) [24], they have 
identified the types of intrusions based on the selected 
features. The performance of the improved method has 
been analyzed using the standard CICIDS 2017 and 
ADFA LD datasets. The proposed method has a better 
attack detection speed than standard WOA and other 
evolutionary algorithms. It is also very accurate and 
suitable for IDS in wireless mesh networks. IDS 
performance was higher than standard WOA detection 
by selecting informative features with an improved Wall 
optimization algorithm. In 2020, Haghnegahdar et al. 
Developed a new intrusion detection model that can 
classify cyber-attacks and power system incidents into 
binary, triple, and multi-class. The intrusion detection 
model is based on a trained Whale Optimization (WOA) 
algorithm and artificial neural network (ANN). WOA is 
applied for initialization and adjustment of the ANN 
weight vector to achieve the minimum square mean 
error. The proposed WOA and ANN model can address 
the challenges of attacks, fault detection and forecasting 
[25, 26] in the system. The University of Mississippi 
Laboratory System and Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
Database Attacks were used to illustrate the proposed 
model and the experimental results. WOA is able to train 

A.Mojtahedi, F.Sorouri, A.N. Souha, A.Molazadeh, S.Shafaei Mehr                                                        Vol. 3, No. 2, 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
16 
 
ANN to find the desired weights. The proposed model is 
used with other common classifiers. Also, a new 
intrusion detection system based on a combination of a 
multilayer neural network (MLP) and an artificial bee 
colony (ABC) and fuzzy clustering algorithms is 
proposed. Clustering [27]is a process by which a set of 
objects can be separated into separate groups [28, 29]. In 
2018, Wang et al. Introduced a network intrusion 
detection system with machine learning algorithm to 
achieve better accuracy and faster detection speed to 
detect or prevent network attacks. The use of machine 
learning, and in particular deep learning [30, 31], is 
another major advantage in which advanced knowledge 
is not required as much as the blacklist model. Normal 
and abnormal bounds of network traffic are detected by 
the MLP, while MLP training is performed using the 
ABC algorithm with Weight values and bias links are 
optimized [32]. CloudSim emulator and NSL-KDD 
dataset are used to test the proposed method. Mean 
absolute error (MAE), mean square error (RMSE) and 
kappa statistical parameters are considered as evaluation 
criteria. The results show that the proposed method is 
superior to modern methods. Intense Learning Machines 
(ELMs) are monolayer artificial neural networks that do 
not need to be replicated. Therefore, their learning speed 
is fast and speed is very important in the success of 
network intrusion detection systems and they defend fast 
and effective response.  
 
3. Suggested Method 
As mentioned in this research, for the network intrusion 
detection system based on the combination of selection, 
a feature set based on the combination of Whale 
optimization algorithm (WOA) and genetic algorithm 
with sample-based classification is presented. The 
proposed method will use the training data set obtained 
from the KDD Cup data set to determine patterns of 
network intrusion detection and the test data set 
prepared from this data set to evaluate the model. In the 
proposed method, considering the diversity and number 
of features of user behavior and network traffic, the 
selection of a subset of features in order to increase the 
accuracy of model classification, it seems necessary. 
The purpose of selecting a subset of features is to 
remove unrelated features and attributes and plugins so 
that in addition to reducing the data dimension and 
reducing the operational and spatial complexity of the 
system, the classification accuracy can be increased and 
high speed and lower cost data classification. In 
addition, the selection of a subset of features can detect 
the implicit dependence between the data and the class 
label of this data so that the classification of test samples 
that will be added to the model in the future can be easily 
done. For this purpose, in the proposed method, the 
WOA GA-based feature subset selection approach has 
been used to determine the features that are important 
and related to the class label. In general, having 
irrelevant and redundant features due to solving the 
classification 
problem, 
affects 
the 
classification 
performance, especially with high-dimensional data 
sets, and reduces the classification accuracy. In addition, 
having a large number of features leads to over-training 
and low ability to generalize the new data and detect test 
samples. Thus, the task of detecting intrusion in wireless 
networks, given the high number of nodes and the 
various features and behavior of each of these nodes in 
the network, can become a difficult classification task 
that it cannot bring optimal results . 
The purpose of selecting features is to eliminate the 
difficulty of classification and increase the accuracy of 
classification by selecting the relevant features. In one-
objective feature selection tasks, feature selection has a 
goal for optimization. The sole purpose of feature 
selection is to find the best feature combination for 
optimal classification performance, regardless of 
training cost or number of features. Feature Selection 
takes the task of selecting a subset of features by turning 
them into an optimization problem, in which the goal is 
to create a balance in order to optimize multiple goals. 
The goals that this optimization method pursues in order 
to select a subset of features include reducing the 
entropy of features based on the class label, increasing 
the standard deviation for differentiating samples of two 
classes, and increasing the classification accuracy of 
nodes in the network, and will increase the accuracy of 
predicting test samples. In fact, the goals include two 
sets of reducing the number of features and increasing 
the classification performance. Consequently, the 
solution to the property choice optimization problem is 
a set of dominant solutions, in which each solution is a 
vector of two components, the number of features and 
the degree of classification error. By using the feature 
selection problem as a minimization problem, the goal 
is to minimize the number of unrelated features and to 
minimize the classification error rate. In the following, 
we will formulate the proposed method. 
3.1. Formulation Problem 
In this research, the feature selection problem is 
considered as a multi-objective optimization problem 
which is solved using a multi-objective particle swarm 
optimization algorithm. The goals of this optimization 
problem are classified into two general groups, one is to 
reduce the number of features and the other is to reduce 
the amount of classification error. Accordingly, the 

Future Generation in Distributed Systems Journal 
 
                                       Vol. 3, No. 2, 2021 
 
17 
 
number of data set properties, independently, indicates 
the dimensions of the problem with the binary search 
space in the range between [0, 1]. Because MOPSO is 
an initial population-based meta-heuristic approach, the 
initial population corresponds to a potential subset of 
features that are directly related to the class tag. As 
shown in Figure 1, in the decision search space, x1 is a 
real positive number that indicates the error rate and x2 
is a real positive number that indicates the number of 
attributes, and the function F which leads to a set 
Balance is made from decision vectors that reduce both 
the error rate and the number of attributes denoted by 
[F(𝑥1), F(𝑥2)]. For example, one decision vector may 
have values v1 = [0.001, 12] and another vector may 
have values v1 = [0.05, 5]. If the evaluation function 
prefers the lowest error rate regardless of a number of 
features, v1 is naturally a satisfactory solution. If so, v2 
is a satisfactory solution for a target function about 
having a minimum number of attributes. Hence, both v1 
and v2 are acceptable solutions, but in the end, another 
victim becomes a target and returns to the decision-
maker's priority.  
In the proposed method, the initial population is adjusted 
with the features in the KDD-CUP dataset. Thus, each 
particle is a binary vector whose value is equal to the 
number of properties, and each element points to a 
property in the data set. In this case, each particle in the 
swarm indicates the property selection with a value of 1. 
Hence, the length of a particle is equal to the number of 
features in the corresponding dataset. Figure 1 shows an 
example of a particle representation, which shows the 
number of properties in a data set equal to 41 properties. 
 
 
Fig.1. shows the initial population vector of the data set 
sample 
 
As shown in Figure 1, each particle in the particle swarm 
optimization algorithm is a set of features in the data set 
that are randomly the number of components of this 
vector may be zero and the number 1. Values that have 
a value of zero represent a property that has not been 
selected, and in contrast, resources that have a value of 
one indicate the selection of a property related to that 
knowledge. As a result, we can see from Figure 1 that 
the selected subset of features includes the feature set 
[F2, F6, F8, F41].  
In the proposed method, in order to select the properties 
for the initial particle vectors, the Sigmoid transfer 
function (S1) is used to define the probability of selecting 
the property or why not selecting it. the function of this 
function is such that if the random probability is less than 
the threshold value of the transfer function, which is 
generally considered to be 0.5, it assigns a value of zero 
to the value associated with this property. Otherwise, a 
value of 1 is recorded for this attribute and the attribute 
will be evaluated based on the objective functions. After 
selecting the initial population, based on the nature of 
the particle swarm optimization algorithm, the initial 
location and velocity of each particle is determined using 
evaluation functions. The location of each particle in this 
method is considered as the selected properties of the 
properties in the data set and the speed of each particle 
is considered as the speed of convergence to the high 
classification rate and reduction of classification error. 
The properties that have the highest value of the 
evaluation function and the greater particle swarm 
around them, results as the output of the initial stage of 
property selection. The best particle position and 
velocity results are saved at this stage and the particle 
position is updated. This process continues until we 
reach a final answer that strikes a balance between the 
goals.  
 
3.2. The objective function 
As mentioned, the proposed method uses a multi-
objective particle swarm algorithm to select a subset of 
class tag-related features. In this method, multiple goals 
are combined and finally we achieve two general 
categories of features in the form of minimization. The 
evaluation of selected subsets of features is based on the 
two main objectives of reducing the number of features 
and the classification error rate. In order to evaluate the 
initial population and select the expert population and 
find the particles with the highest weight, the 
proportionality function is expressed as Equation.1. 
 
𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑧𝑒 𝐹(𝑥) =
{
𝑓1(𝑥) =
𝐿
𝐴     , 𝐿∈𝐴, 𝐴∈ℝ+
𝑓2(𝑥) = 1 −
𝐹𝑃+𝐹𝑁
𝑃+𝑁 , (𝑃+ 𝑁) ∈ℝ+                     Eq.1 
 
In relation L, the number of features selected from the 
data set and A is the total number of features. In order to 
evaluate the error rate of each particle according to the 
selected properties in each step, the perturbation matrix 
criteria in which the true positive (TP) is used to 
represent those normal nodes that are correctly 
represented by the classification model as normal 
according to the selected features. False positive (FP) to 
indicate 
those 
normal 
nodes 
that 
have 
been 
misdiagnosed by the classification model and intrusion 
according to the selected characteristics, true negative 
(TN) to indicate those Infiltration nodes that are 
correctly classified by the model and according to the 
selected characteristics, the intrusion is detected and 
finally the real positive (FN) to show those intrusion 
nodes that are mistaken by The classification model is 
applied and normalized according to the selected 
features. In Equation 1, P is equal to the sum of TP+FN 

A.Mojtahedi, F.Sorouri, A.N. Souha, A.Molazadeh, S.Shafaei Mehr                                                        Vol. 3, No. 2, 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
18 
 
and N is equal to FP+TN. The first objective function f1 
(x) is related to the ratio of the selected attributes to the 
total attributes in the data set, while the second objective 
is f2 (x) to evaluate the classification error rate.  
In the proposed method, the particles at each stage use 
the SVM algorithm to evaluate the training samples in 
order to evaluate the amount of classification error for 
each particle and by obtaining the classification error 
rate, according to the number of features selected, the 
best particles in each step are selected and ranked in each 
step based on the degree of optimality. By converting 
these properties obtained from each particle into 
property vectors, SVM will try to differentiate between 
healthy nodes and malicious nodes and create a safe 
margin between the two classes. Finally, the least 
amount of error and the least number of features selected 
from the training data set will be selected as the best 
particle and the extracted features will be specified as the 
classification pattern. Figure 2 shows the proposed 
flowchart. 
 
4. Implement the proposed method 
In this part of the research, we first describe the standard 
data set of intrusion in wireless networks. Then, in order 
to implement the proposed method, we will first 
implement the feature subset selection method based on 
the WOA-GA algorithm and then evaluate it using the 
nearest neighbor k algorithm. 
 
4.1. Standard data penetration in wireless networks 
Due to the nature of the proposed method, in order to 
implement the combined feature selection method based 
on Whale optimization algorithm and Genetic algorithm, 
we will use a standard network penetration data set 
called kddcup99 which is stored in the UCI data 
repository. The present dataset includes the activities of 
nodes in the wireless network that have been simulated 
in the Lincoln Lab for several months. By monitoring 
the nodes in this experiment in order to collect the 
standard data set, the status of each node in the data set 
is determined. Depending on the behavior of the nodes 
in the network, each node is either considered as a 
healthy node or represents some kind of intrusion into 
the wireless network. In this regard, in the method of 
proposing data sets in two classes of healthy nodes and 
Abuse nodes are trained as network penetration. 
 
 
 
Fig.2. the proposed flowchart 
 
4.2. Implement WOA GA-based feature selection  
According to the proposed method, the initial population 
in the WOA-GA algorithm is binary vectors, which 
represent each of the index properties of the desired 
property in the main data set. The length of the vectors 
as the initial population is proportional to the number of 
attributes in the main data set. So each Whale is defined 
as a solution in a vector with n elements, where n is 
proportional to the number of attributes in the original 
data set. In the proposed method, first 100 Whales 
Extract features from the KDD-
CUP dataset 
Select particle attributes using the 
Sigmoid function
 
Classify data with SVM based on 
primary particle population 
characteristics
 
Estimating the initial population 
based on multiple objective 
function
 
Selection of certified particles 
according to the results of the 
objective function
 
 Is the best near-
optimal answer 
obtained? 
Optimal particle ranking according 
to the value of the objective 
function
 
Yes 
No
 
Update particle position 
and speed
 
Choose the best valley with the least 
error and the least number of features
 
Create templates and test 
datasets to predict intrusion
 
End
 

Future Generation in Distributed Systems Journal 
 
                                       Vol. 3, No. 2, 2021 
 
19 
 
(solution) are selected as the initial random population. 
In the WOA-GA algorithm, the initial population 
consists of a matrix with dimensions of 41 x 100 of 
random numbers between zero and one. Each element of 
this matrix in row i and column j represents the 
probability of the property j in the solution (Whale) of i. 
According to the random selection function in the 
proposed method, the values within the components of 
this matrix are binary. In this way, if the value of each 
drive is less than the threshold, the drive will be set to 
zero, otherwise it will be set to 1 value. In the initial 
population matrix, the j  property will not exist in the i 
solution if the 𝐴𝑖𝑗 array has a value of zero, but if the 
value of this array is equal to one, the j property is one 
of the properties selected in the solution properties of i 
subset in (Whale). 
 
Fig.3.Mean Proportional Values for Solutions in WOA 
 
 As can be seen from Figure 3, the proportionality values 
for the solutions decreased during the iteration, from 
0.024 to 0.005 per 100 iterations of the WOA-GA 
algorithm. The mean values of the proposed solution 
indicate the superiority of the WOA-GA algorithm in 
finding a subset of features with the least amount of 
error. 
 
Fig.4. Convergence of the WOA-GA algorithm 
towards the optimal point 
 
According to Figure 4, what can be seen is that the 
WOA-GA algorithm has a rapid convergence to the 
optimal point, which is zero. Given that the nature of the 
fit function in the proposed method of minimizing the 
value of the fit function and minimizing the amount of 
intrusion detection error in the wireless network, 
therefore the rapid convergence to the minimum point 
indicates the correct choice instead of combining the 
optimization pattern Whale and Genetic algorithms in 
order to select a subset of useful features in the standard 
network intrusion detection dataset. 
 
Table1. Subset of features selected by the WOA-GA 
algorithm 
Feature Name 
Feature 
No
Feature Name 
Feature 
No
"Num_file_Creations" 
17 
"Duration" 
1 
"Num_shells" 
18 
"Protocol_Type" 
2 
"Num_access_files" 
19 
"Dst_bytes" 
5 
"Serror_rate" 
23 
"Flag" 
6 
"Srv_rerror_rate" 
29 
"Hot" 
10 
"dst_host_srv_count" 
32 
"Logged_in" 
12 
"dst_host_diff_srv_rate" 
34 
"Num_compromis
ed" 
13 
"dst_host_rerror_rate" 
39 
"Root_shell" 
14 
"dst_host_srv_rerror_rate
" 
40 
"Su_attempted" 
15 
"Is_hot_login" 
41 
"Num_root" 
16 
 
5. Evaluate the proposed method 
Evaluation of the proposed method to analyze and 
evaluate the performance of the proposed method on the 
test data set, which is part of the initial standard data set, 
is in order to identify new attacks in the network. 
Therefore, different criteria have been introduced to 
evaluate the performance of network intrusion detection 
systems, each of which examines a different aspect of 

A.Mojtahedi, F.Sorouri, A.N. Souha, A.Molazadeh, S.Shafaei Mehr                                                        Vol. 3, No. 2, 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
the model, but in general, the improvement of each 
criterion indicates an improvement in the model 
performance in the standard intrusion detection dataset 
in wireless networks. In this study, the criteria related to 
the turbulence matrix have been used to evaluate the 
proposed method. Thus, based on the confusion matrix, 
the results of this comparison can be summarized in four 
parameters: 
 
 True positive TP: nodes that are properly 
selected as healthy nodes based on the 
proposed model. 
 
The real negative of FP: is the nodes that have 
been correctly selected as abusive nodes based 
on the proposed model. 
 
False Positive TN: nodes that have been 
selected as healthy nodes based on the 
proposed model, but are in fact a malicious 
node. 
 
True positive FN: nodes that have been selected 
as abusive nodes based on the proposed model, 
but are in fact a healthy node. 
Given that the confusion matrix is a well-known 
mechanism 
for 
evaluating 
the 
classification 
performance in two-part datasets (healthy nodes versus 
abusive nodes), evaluation criteria can be derived from 
the confusion matrix. These criteria include accuracy, 
sensitivity, precision and F-criteria.  
 
 
Fig.5. Accuracy diagram of WOA-GA algorithm for 
test data set 
 
According to Figure 5, what can be seen is that the 
WOA-GA algorithm for selecting the set of effective 
features and combining it with the KNN algorithm has 
high accuracy standard values for detecting malicious 
nodes in the test data set and serious nodes which join 
the pseudo. Also, according to Figure 6, what can be 
seen is that the WOA-GA algorithm for selecting the 
effective feature subset and combining it with the KNN 
algorithm has high sensitivity criteria for detecting 
malicious nodes in the test data set and serious nodes 
which join the pseudo. 
 
Fig.6. Sensitivity diagram of WOA-GA algorithm for 
test data set 
 
 
Fig.7. Diagram of the accuracy of the WOA-GA 
algorithm for the test dataset 
 
According to Figure 7, what can be seen is that the 
WOA-GA algorithm for selecting the effective feature 
subset and combining it with the KNN algorithm has 
high accuracy standard values for detecting abusive 
nodes in the test data set and serious nodesw which join 
the pseudo. 
According to Figure 8, what can be seen is that the 
WOA-GA algorithm for selecting the effective feature 

Future Generation in Distributed Systems Journal 
 
                                       Vol. 3, No. 2, 2021 
 
21 
 
subset and combining it with the KNN algorithm has 
high F-value values for detecting malicious nodes in the 
test data set and serious nodes which join the pseudo. 
 
 
Fig.8. Benchmark of WOA-GA algorithm for test data 
set 
 
6. Comparison of the proposed method with 
previous methods 
After evaluating the performance of the proposed 
method against the test data set, in order to check the 
accuracy of the results of the proposed method, which is 
a combination of Whale optimization algorithm and 
genetic algorithm and KNN classification, the proposed 
method in terms of node detection accuracy Abuse in the 
network of previous methods [7, 33] will be compared 
in this regard. Figure 9 Comparison of the proposed 
method with previous methods is illustrated in terms of 
accuracy criteria. 
 
Fig.9. Comparison of the proposed method with 
previous methods 
 
According to Figure 9, what can be seen is that the 
proposed method has been compared with the previous 
methods according to the accuracy criterion. According 
to Figure 9, it can be seen that the proposed method 
based on the combination of feature selection based on 
Whale optimization algorithm and Genetic algorithm 
with KNN classification in terms of accuracy criteria, 
has better results than other previous methods. Based on 
this, it can be said that the Whale optimization algorithm 
and the Genetic algorithm have extracted the features 
related to the class label well, and the KNN method has 
been able to well detect the misconduct nodes in the 
intrusion detection data set in wirless-networks.  
 
7. Conclusion 
Due to the widespread use of communication networks 
and the ease of communication through wireless 
networks, this type of network has received more 
attention than ever before. Ability to use in any 
environment without the need for environmental 
monitoring and engineering of these networks, has 
increased their use in various fields. Increased use of 
them has also raised security issues in the field of 
sending and receiving information, which is known as 
intrusion detection as the most important issue. Network 
intrusion detection is the process of identifying 
malicious activity in a network by analyzing network 
traffic behavior. These networks are relatively 
vulnerable to other networks due to their wireless nature, 
limited resources, mobility and dynamics, and their 
important and vital tasks. There are several ways to 
provide security in wireless networks, but these methods 
are not able to detect more attacks. In addition, due to 
the limited energy of wireless nodes, it has become 
virtually impossible to use monitoring nodes for 
permanent monitoring in wireless networks in order to 
prevent and detect intrusions and attacks in these types 
of networks. Therefore, intrusion detection and network 
detection systems (NIDS) play an important role in 
providing security in wireless networks and can cover a 
wide range of attacks. In this research, a network 
intrusion detection system using feature selection based 
on a combination of Whale optimization (WOA) and 
Genetics (GA) and sample-based classification is 
proposed. In this research, the standard data set 
KDDCUP1999 
has 
been 
used 
in 
which 
the 
characteristics related to healthy nodes and types of 
malicious nodes are stored based on the type of attacks 
in the network. The proposed method is based on the 
combination of feature selection based on Wall 
optimization algorithm and genetic algorithm with KNN 
classification in terms of accuracy criteria, has better 
results than other previous methods. Based on this, it can 
be said that the Whale optimization algorithm and the 
genetic algorithm have extracted the features related to 
the class label well, and the KNN method has been able 
to detect the nodes of misconduct in the data set of 
intrusion detection in wireless networks.  
99.85
97
94.9295.4
91.48
95.3595.7194.32
96.7598.12
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
102
ACCURACY

A.Mojtahedi, F.Sorouri, A.N. Souha, A.Molazadeh, S.Shafaei Mehr                                                        Vol. 3, No. 2, 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
22
