The RatioLog Project: Rational Extensions of Logical Reasoning
Ulrich Furbach · Claudia Schon · Frieder Stolzenburg · Karl-Heinz Weis ·
Claus-Peter Wirth
Abstract Higher-level cognition includes logical reasoning
and the ability of question answering with common sense.
The RatioLog project addresses the problem of rational rea-
soning in deep question answering by methods from auto-
mated deduction and cognitive computing. In a ﬁrst phase,
we combine techniques from information retrieval and ma-
chine learning to ﬁnd appropriate answer candidates from
the huge amount of text in the German version of the free
encyclopedia “Wikipedia”. In a second phase, an automated
theorem prover tries to verify the answer candidates on
the basis of their logical representations. In a third phase
— because the knowledge may be incomplete and inconsis-
tent —, we consider extensions of logical reasoning to im-
prove the results. In this context, we work toward the appli-
cation of techniques from human reasoning: We employ de-
feasible reasoning to compare the answers w.r.t. speciﬁcity,
deontic logic, normative reasoning, and model construction.
Moreover, we use integrated case-based reasoning and ma-
chine learning techniques on the basis of the semantic struc-
ture of the questions and answer candidates to learn giving
the right answers.
Keywords automated deduction · case-based reasoning ·
common-sense reasoning · defeasible reasoning · deontic
logic · question answering · speciﬁcity
U. Furbach, C. Schon, K.-H. Weis
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research Group, Universit¨at Koblenz-Landau,
Universit¨atsstr. 1, 56070 Koblenz, Germany

F. Stolzenburg, C.-P. Wirth
Automation and Computer Sciences Department, Harz University of
Applied Sciences, Friedrichstr. 57–59, 38855 Wernigerode, Germany

1 Rational Reasoning and Question Answering
The development of formal logic played a big role in the
ﬁeld of automated reasoning, which led to the development
of the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI). Applications of au-
tomated deduction in mathematics have been investigated
from the early years on. Nowadays automated deduction
techniques are successfully applied in hard- and software
veriﬁcation and many other areas (for an overview see [2]).
In contrast to formal logical reasoning, however, human
reasoning does not strictly follow the rules of classical logic.
Reasons may be incomplete knowledge, incorrect beliefs,
and inconsistent norms. From the very beginning of AI re-
search, there has been a strong emphasis on incorporating
mechanisms for rationality, such as abductive or defeasible
reasoning. From these efforts, as part of the ﬁeld of knowl-
edge representation, common-sense reasoning has emerged
as a branching discipline with many applications in AI [17].
Nowadays there is a chance to join automated deduction
and common-sense reasoning within the paradigm of cog-
nitive computing, which allows the implementation of ratio-
nal reasoning [16]. The general motivation for the develop-
ment of cognitive systems is that computers can solve well-
deﬁned mathematical problems with enormous precision at
a reasonably sufﬁcient speed in practice. It remains difﬁcult,
however, to solve problems that are only vaguely outlined.
One important characteristic of cognitive computing is that
many different knowledge formats and many different infor-
mation processing methods are used in a combined fashion.
Also the amount of knowledge is huge and, even worse, it
is even increasing steadily. For the logical reasoning, a sim-
ilar argument holds: Different reasoning mechanisms have
to be employed and combined, such as classical deduction
(forward reasoning) on the one hand, and abduction or other
non-monotonic reasoning mechanisms on the other hand.
Let us illustrate this with a well-known example from
the literature:
arXiv:1503.06087v2  [cs.AI]  30 Jul 2015

2
Ulrich Furbach et al.
NL Answer 
Generation
proofs
best  
answers
Answer 
   Validation
text  
passages
Ranking
answer  
candidates
Who is  
Ian Fleming?
IR
Reasoning
British Author!
LogAnswer
System
FOL
Wiki
KB
KB
Backgr.
Figure 1 The LogAnswer system uses information retrieval (IR), decision tree learning in a ranking phase, reasoning, and natural language answer
generation to compute answers.
1. Tom is an emu.
2. Emus are birds.
3. Birds normally ﬂy.
4. Emus do not ﬂy.
The question is: Can emus ﬂy or not? Forward reason-
ing allows us to infer that emus are birds and hence can nor-
mally ﬂy. This is in conﬂict, however, with the strict back-
ground knowledge that emus do not ﬂy. The conﬂict can be
solved by assuming certain knowledge as default or defea-
sible, which only holds normally. Hence we may conclude
here that emus and therefore Tom does not ﬂy. We will come
back to this example later (namely in Section 2.2 and 2.3).
Rational reasoning must be able to deal with incom-
plete as well as conﬂicting (or even inconsistent) knowledge.
Moreover, huge knowledge bases with inconsistent contents
must be handled. Therefore, it seems to be a good idea to
combine and thus enhance rational reasoning by information
retrieval techniques, e.g. techniques from machine learning.
This holds especially for the domain of deep question an-
swering, where communication with patterns of human rea-
soning is desirable.
1.1 Deep Question Answering and the LogAnswer System
Typically, question answering systems, including applica-
tion programs such as Okay Google® or Apple®’s Siri,
communicate with the user in natural language. They ac-
cept properly formulated questions and return concise an-
swers. These automatically generated answers are usually
not extracted directly from the web, but, in addition, the sys-
tem operates on an extensive (background) knowledge base,
which has been derived from textual sources in advance.
LogAnswer [8,9] is an open-domain question answering
system, accessible via a web interface (www.loganswer.
de) similar to that of a search engine. The knowledge used
to answer the question is gained from 29.1 million natural-
language sentences of a snapshot of the German Wikipedia.
Furthermore, a background knowledge consisting of 12,000
logical facts and rules is used. The LogAnswer system was
developed in the DFG-funded LogAnswer project, a coop-
eration between the groups on Intelligent Information and
Communication Systems at the FernUniversit¨at Hagen and
the AI research group at the University of Koblenz-Landau.
The project aimed at the development of efﬁcient and robust
methods for logic-based question answering. The user enters
a question and LogAnswer presents the ﬁve best answers
from a snapshot of the German “Wikipedia”, highlighted in
the context of the relevant textual sources.
Most question answering systems rely on shallow lin-
guistic methods for answer derivation, and there is only lit-
tle effort to include semantics and logical reasoning. This
may make it impossible for the system to ﬁnd any answers:
A superﬁcial word matching algorithm is bound to fail if
the textual sources use synonyms of the words in the ques-
tion. Therefore, the LogAnswer system models some form
of background knowledge, and combines cognitive aspects
of linguistic analysis, such as semantic nets in a logical rep-
resentation, with machine learning techniques for determin-
ing the most appropriate answer candidate.
Contrary to other systems, LogAnswer uses an auto-
mated theorem prover to compute the replies, namely Hy-
per [3], an implementation of the hypertableaux calculus
[1], extended with equality among others. It has demon-
strated its strength in particular for reasoning problems with
a large number of irrelevant axioms, as they are character-
istic for the setting of question answering. The logical rea-
soning is done on the basis of a logical representation of
the semantics of the entire text contained in the Wikipedia
snapshot. This is computed beforehand with a system de-
veloped by computational linguists [13] which employs the
MultiNet graph formalism (Multilayered Extended Seman-
tic Networks) [15].
Since methods from natural-language processing are of-
ten confronted with ﬂawed textual data, they strive toward
robustness and speed, but often lack the ability to perform
more complex inferences. By contrast, a theorem prover
uses a sound calculus to derive precise proofs of a higher
complexity; even minor ﬂaws or omissions in the data, how-
ever, lead to a failure of the entire derivation process. Thus,
additional techniques from machine learning, defeasible and
normative reasoning etc. should be applied to improve the
quality of the answers — as done in the RatioLog project.

The RatioLog Project: Rational Extensions of Logical Reasoning
3
Candidate Selection
Answer Validation
Reasoning
LogAnswer
System
Information 
Retrieval
Decision Tree 
Learning
Case-Based  
Reasoning
Defeasible 
Logic
Hyper
First-Order 
Logic
Deontic 
Logic
Figure 2 Techniques used in the different modules of the LogAnswer
system.
For this, the reasoning in classical logic is extended by
various forms of non-monotonic aspects, such as defeasible
argumentation. By these extensions, the open-domain ques-
tion answering system LogAnswer is turned into a system
for rational question answering, which offers a testbed for
the evaluation of rational reasoning.
1.2 The LogAnswer System and its Modules
When processing a question, the LogAnswer system per-
forms several different steps. Figure 1 presents details on
these steps. At ﬁrst, information retrieval (IR), i.e. pattern
matching, is used to ﬁlter text passages suitable for the given
question from the textual representation of the Wikipedia.
For this, the text sources are segmented into sentence-sized
passages. The corresponding representation can be enriched
by the descriptors of other sentences that result from a coref-
erence solution of pronouns, where the referred phrase is
added to the description, if e.g. the pronoun ’he’ refers to the
individual ’Ian Fleming’. Then decision tree learning ranks
the text passages and chooses a set of answer candidates
from these text passages (Ranking step in Figure 1). Here,
features like the number of matching lexemes between pas-
sages and the question or the occurrences of proper names
in the passage are computed. Up to 200 text passages are ex-
tracted from the knowledge base according to this ranking.
In the next step (Reasoning), the Hyper theorem prover
is used to check if these text passages provide an answer to
the question. For every answer candidate, a ﬁrst-order logic
representation of both the question and the answer candi-
date is combined with a huge background knowledge. These
proofs provide the answer to the question by means of vari-
able assignments. The proofs for the answer candidates are
then ranked again using decision tree learning (in the an-
swer validation phase). For the ﬁve best answers, text pas-
sages providing the answer are highlighted and presented to
the user. This is done by a natural language (NL) answer
generation module, which eventually yields the ﬁnal answer
candidates, in our case that Ian Fleming is a British author.
In the LogAnswer system, various techniques work in-
terlocked. See Figure 2 for an overview of the different tech-
niques together with the modules in which they are used. Ex-
traction of text passages for a certain question is performed
in the candidate selection module. In this module, both in-
formation retrieval and decision tree learning work hand in
hand to ﬁnd a list of answer candidates for the current ques-
tion. For each answer candidate, the reasoning module is in-
voked. This module consists of the Hyper theorem prover,
which is used to check if the answer candidate provides
an answer for the question. Since Hyper is able to handle
ﬁrst-order logic with equality and knowledge bases given in
description logic, it is possible to incorporate background
knowledge given in various (formal) languages.
An interesting extension of usual background knowl-
edge is the use of a knowledge base containing norma-
tive statements formalized in deontic logic. These normative
statements enable the system to reason in a rational way.
Since deontic logic can be translated into description log-
ics, Hyper can be used to reason on such knowledge bases.
Reasoning in defeasible logic is another technique contained
in the reasoning module of the LogAnswer system. With the
help of defeasible logic reasoning, different proofs produced
by Hyper are compared. The proofs found by Hyper provide
answers to the given question by means of variable assign-
ments. Comparing the proofs for different answer candidates
therefore is used to determine the best answer. Hence defea-
sible logic is contained in the answer validation module. In
addition to that, the answer validation module contains de-
cision tree learning to rank different proofs found by Hyper
and case-based reasoning. Details on the use of case-based
reasoning and reasoning in defeasible logic, that can both be
used in the answer validation phase (see Figure 1), can be
found in the Section 2.
2 Searching for Good Answers
As depicted before, the reasoning component of the LogAn-
swer system delivers proofs, which represent the possible
answers to the given question. The proofs are ranked by de-
cision trees which take into account several attributes of the
reasoning process together with the attribute from the previ-
ous information retrieval step.
In addition to this ranking, we experiment with dif-
ferent other techniques to improve the evaluation of an-
swers. These are case-based reasoning (CBR) (Section 2.1),
defeasible reasoning (Section 2.2), and normative (de-
ontic) reasoning (Section 2.3). To perform systematic
and extensive tests with LogAnswer, we used the CLEF
database, strictly speaking, its question answering part.

4
Ulrich Furbach et al.
CLEF stands for cross-language evaluation forum, see www.
clef-campaign.org. It is an international campaign pro-
viding language data in different languages, e.g. from news-
paper articles. Its workshop and competition series contains
a track on question answering. We used data from CLEF-
2007 and CLEF-2008 [12,18].
2.1 CBR Similarity Measures and Machine Learning
Answer validation can be enhanced by using experience
knowledge in form of cases in a case base. The resulting sys-
tem module is designed as a learning system and based on a
dedicated CBR control structure. Contrary to common pro-
cedures in natural-language processing, however, we do not
follow the textual approach, where experiences are available
in unstructured or semi-structured text form, but use a struc-
tured approach along the lines of [4]. This is possible be-
cause the knowledge source is available not only in textual
but also in a logical format. The semantics of the natural-
language text is given basically by ﬁrst-order predicate logic
formulae, which are represented by MultiNet graphs [15].
Our basis is a manually achieved classiﬁcation for each pair
of question (from the CLEF 2007 and 2008 data) and an-
swer candidate (from the LogAnswer system) whether the
answer candidate is a good one for the question. In order to
compare and to deﬁne a similarity measure of the MultiNet
graphs, we have developed a new graph similarity measure
[14,22] which improves other existing measures, e.g. [4,6].
We measured the CBR system classiﬁcation accuracy by
running tests with a case base from the CLEF 2007 and 2008
data. Our overall test set had 254 very heterogeneous ques-
tions and ca. 15000 cases. For instance, in one of the evalua-
tions, namely the user interaction simulation (see Figure 3),
we examined the development of the results for a growing
knowledge base. We simulated users that give reliable feed-
back to new, heterogeneous questions for which the Log-
Answer system provides answers candidates. The test set-
ting was to guess the classiﬁcation of questions and answer
candidates the system does not have in the knowledge base.
The results show the increase of the classiﬁcation accuracy
with a growing number of correct cases in the case base.
We performed a number of other evaluation experiments,
e.g. 3- and 10-fold cross validations. For more information
about the integrated CBR/Machine learning evaluation and
test settings, please refer to [14,22].
We further integrated case-based reasoning into the al-
ready existing answer selection techniques in LogAnswer
(answer validation phase, see Figure 1). For this, the re-
sults of the CBR stage were turned into numeric features. A
ranking model determined by a supervised learning-to-rank
approach combined these CBR-based features with other
answer selection features determined by shallow linguistic
processing and logical answer validation The ﬁnal machine
Figure 3 The x-axis is the number of cases in the case base. The y-
axis is the classiﬁcation accuracy in percent, for correct and incorrect
answer candidates, as well as the overall classiﬁcation accuracy for the
user interaction simulation.
learning ranker is an ensemble of ten rank-optimizing de-
cision trees, obtained by stratiﬁed bagging, whose individ-
ual probability estimates are combined by averaging. When
training the machine learning ranker on a case base opti-
mized for perfect treatment of correct answer candidates, we
get the best overall result in our tests with a mean reciprocal
rank (MRR) of 0.74 (0.72 without CBR) and a correct top-
ranked answer chosen in 61% (58% without CBR) of the
cases. It is instructive to consider the usage of CBR features
in the machine learning ranker, by inspecting all branching
conditions in the generated trees and counting the frequency
of occurrence of each feature in such a branching condition,
since 10 bags of 10 decision trees were generated in the 10
cross-validation runs, there is a total of 100 trees to base re-
sults on [14,22]. In total, 42.5% of all split conditions in the
learned trees involve one of the CBR attributes. This further
demonstrates the strong impact of CBR results on answer
re-ranking.
2.2 The Speciﬁcity Criterion
More speciﬁc answer candidates are to be preferred to less
speciﬁc ones, and we can compare them according to their
speciﬁcity as follows. To obtain what argumentation theo-
ries call an argument, we form a pair of an answer candidate
and its derivation. The derivation can be based on positive-
conditional rules, generated from Hyper’s veriﬁcations and
capturing the Wikipedia page of the answer candidate and
the linguistic knowledge actually applied. Now we ﬁnd our-
selves in the setting of defeasible reasoning and can sort the
arguments according to their speciﬁcity.
In defeasible reasoning, certain knowledge is assumed
to be defeasible. Strict knowledge, however, is speciﬁed by
contingent facts (e.g. in the emu example from Section 1,
“Tom is an emu”) and general rules holding in all possi-

The RatioLog Project: Rational Extensions of Logical Reasoning
5
ble worlds without exception (e.g. “emus do not ﬂy”). Strict
knowledge is always preferred to knowledge depending also
on defeasible rules (e.g. “birds normally ﬂy”).
Already in 1985, David Poole had the idea to prefer
more speciﬁc arguments in case of conﬂicting results as fol-
lows [19]: For any derivation of a given result, represented
as a tree, consider the sets of all leaves that contribute to the
applications of defeasible rules. An activation set is a set of
literals from which all literals labeling such a set of leaves is
derivable. Thereby, an activation set is sufﬁcient to activate
the defeasible parts of a derivation in the sense of a presup-
position, without using any additional contingent facts.
One argument is now more speciﬁc than another one if
all its activation sets are activation sets of the other one. This
means that each activation set of the more speciﬁc argument
(seen as the conjunction of its literals) must be more spe-
ciﬁc than an activation set of the other one. Note that the
meaning of the latter usage of the word “speciﬁc” is just the
traditional common-sense concept of speciﬁcity, according
to which a criterion (here: conjunction of literals) is more
speciﬁc than another one if it entails the other one.
We discovered several weaknesses of Poole’s relation,
such as its non-transitivity: Contrary to what is obviously
intended in [19] and “proved” in [20], Poole’s relation is not
a quasi-ordering and cannot generate an ordering. We were
able to cure all the discovered weaknesses by deﬁning a
quasi-ordering [23,24] (i.e. a reﬂexive and transitive binary
relation), which can be seen as a correction of Poole’s rela-
tion, maintaining and clarifying Poole’s original intuition.
The intractability of Poole’s relation, known at least
since 2003 [21], was attenuated by our quasi-ordering and
then overcome by restricting the rules to instances that were
actually used in the proofs found by Hyper, and by treating
the remaining variables (if any) as constants. With these re-
strictions, the intractability did not show up anymore in any
of the hundreds of examples we tested with our PROLOG
implementation.
Running this implementation through the entire CLEF-
2008 database, almost all suggested answer solutions turned
out to be incomparable w.r.t. speciﬁcity, although our quasi-
ordering can compare more arguments in practice than
Poole’s original relation. One problem here is that we have
to classify the rules of the CLEF examples as being either
general or defeasible, but there is no obvious way to classify
them. Another problem with the knowledge encoded in the
MultiNet formalism is that it ﬁrst and foremost encodes only
linguistic knowledge, e.g., who is the agent of a given sen-
tence. Only little background knowledge is available, such
as on ontology. All data from the web pages, however, are
represented by literals.
To employ more (defeasible) background knowledge we
investigated other examples, such as the emu example from
Section 1. Here, the formalization in ﬁrst-order logic of the
natural-language knowledge on individuals can be achieved
with the Boxer system [5,7], which is dedicated to large-
scale language processing applications. These examples can
be successfully treated with the speciﬁcity criterion and also
with deontic logic (see subsequent section).
2.3 Making Use of Deontic Logic
Normative statements like “you ought not steal” are om-
nipresent in our everyday life, and humans are used to do
reason with respect to them. Since norms can be helpful
to model rationality, they constitute an important aspect for
common-sense reasoning. This is why normative reasoning
is investigated in the RatioLog project [10]. Standard deon-
tic logic (SDL) [11] is a logic which is very suitable for the
formalization of knowledge about norms. SDL corresponds
to the modal logic K together with a seriality axiom. In SDL
the modal operator 2 is interpreted as “it is obligatory that”
and the 3 operator as “it is permitted that”. For example a
norm like “you ought not steal” can be intuitively formal-
ized as 2¬steal. From a model theoretic point of view, the
seriality axiom contained in SDL ensures that, whenever it
is obligatory that something holds, there is always an ideal
world fulﬁlling the obligation.
In the RatioLog project, we experiment with SDL by
adding normative statements into the background knowl-
edge. The emu example from Section 1 contains the nor-
mative assertion
Birds normally ﬂy.
which can be modeled using SDL as
Bird →2Flies
and is added to the background knowledge. In addition to
normative statements, the background knowledge further-
more contains assertions not containing any modal opera-
tors, e.g. something like the statement that all emus are birds.
Formulae representing contingent facts, like the assertion
Tom is an emu.
in the emu example, are combined with the background
knowledge containing information about norms. The Hy-
per theorem prover [3] can be used to analyze the resulting
knowledge base. For example, it is possible to ask the prover
if the observed world with the emu Tom fulﬁlls the norm that
birds usually are able to ﬂy.
Within the RatioLog project both defeasible logic and
deontic logic are used. There are similarities between de-
feasible logic and deontic logic. For example in defeasible
logic there are rules which are considered to be not strict but
defeasible. These defeasible rules are similar to normative
statements, since norms only describe how the world ought

6
Ulrich Furbach et al.
to be and not how it actually is. This is why we are also in-
vestigating the connection between these two logics within
the RatioLog project.
3 Conclusions
Deep question answering does not only require pattern
matching and indexing techniques, but also rational reason-
ing. This has been investigated within the RatioLog project
as demonstrated in this article. Techniques from machine
learning with similarity measures and case-based reasoning,
defeasible reasoning with (a revision of) the speciﬁcity crite-
rion, and normative reasoning with deontic logic help to se-
lect good answer candidates. If the background knowledge,
however, mainly encodes linguistic knowledge — without
general common-sense world knowledge — then the effect
on ﬁnding good answer candidates is low. Therefore, future
work will concentrate on employing even more background
world knowledge (e.g. from ontology databases), so that ra-
tional reasoning can be exploited more effectively when ap-
plied to this concrete knowledge.
Acknowledgements The authors gratefully acknowledge the support
of the DFG under the grants FU 263/15-1 and STO 421/5-1 Ratiolog.
