1
Deep Reinforcement Learning with
Quantum-inspired Experience Replay
Qing Wei, Hailan Ma, Chunlin Chen, Member, IEEE, Daoyi Dong, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—In this paper, a novel training paradigm inspired
by quantum computation is proposed for deep reinforcement
learning (DRL) with experience replay. In contrast to traditional
experience replay mechanism in DRL, the proposed deep re-
inforcement learning with quantum-inspired experience replay
(DRL-QER) adaptively chooses experiences from the replay
buffer according to the complexity and the replayed times of each
experience (also called transition), to achieve a balance between
exploration and exploitation. In DRL-QER, transitions are ﬁrst
formulated in quantum representations, and then the preparation
operation and the depreciation operation are performed on the
transitions. In this progress, the preparation operation reﬂects the
relationship between the temporal difference errors (TD-errors)
and the importance of the experiences, while the depreciation
operation is taken into account to ensure the diversity of the
transitions. The experimental results on Atari 2600 games show
that DRL-QER outperforms state-of-the-art algorithms such as
DRL-PER and DCRL on most of these games with improved
training efﬁciency, and is also applicable to such memory-based
DRL approaches as double network and dueling network.
Index Terms—Deep reinforcement learning, quantum rein-
forcement learning, quantum computation, quantum-inspired
experience replay.
I. INTRODUCTION
R
EINFORCEMENT
learning
(RL)
is
an
intelligent
paradigm that learns through the interaction with the
environment. During the training process of this interaction-
based algorithm, similar to human behaviours [1]–[3], the
agent adjusts its behavior to maximize the cumulative rewards
for the entire control task according to the retroaction it
receives from the environment. When it comes to the general
situation of the real world environment, most control tasks
often come with high-dimensional inputs, where traditional
RL approaches cannot work well. Fortunately, deep learning
provides a new approach to handle the complex input infor-
mation and has achieved huge breakthrough in various ﬁelds
[4]–[10]. In particular, by combining deep learning with RL, a
new framework of deep reinforcement learning (DRL) arises,
where Deep Q Network (DQN) becomes one of the most
famous DRL methods [11].
DQN was employed to estimate the action values to help the
agent make sequential decisions, where raw images were fed
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (No.71732003 and No.61828303) and by the Australian Research
Council’s Discovery Projects funding scheme under project DP190101566.
Q. Wei, H. Ma and C. Chen are with the Department of Control and Systems
Engineering, School of Management and Engineering, Nanjing University,

D. Dong is with the School of Engineering and Information Technology,

into the convolutional neural networks followed by the fully
connected networks to output the action values that estimated
the future rewards. In order to improve the utilization of
the state-action transitions, an experience replay mechanism
was deployed in the DQN framework [12], where experiences
were stored in a ﬁnite-size buffer and were retrieved from the
buffer. This mechanism of experience replay effectively sped
up the processing of the experiences during training, but it
ignored the difference in the importance between experiences.
A series of experience replay variants have been developed
to further improve the learning process, such as prioritized
experience replay (PER) [13], deep curriculum reinforcement
learning (DCRL) [14], remember and forget for experience
replay (ReF-ER) [15], attentive experience replay (AER) [16]
and competitive experience replay (CER) [17].
In PER, temporal difference errors (TD-errors) determine
the priorities of the experiences and inﬂuence the proba-
bilities of those experiences’ being replayed. This method
further enhance the utilization of experiences compared to
the original experience replay, but the data generated by the
agent are noisy. Since DRL-PER gives higher priorities to
transitions with larger TD errors and there might exist some
experiences whose large TD-errors would not decrease even
after many times of replay. From this respective, DRL-PER
may cause some experiences to be overused, which might
result in oscillations of the neural network [18]. To improve
the sample efﬁciency of DQN, DCRL proposed a criterion
for the samples’ importance based on the difﬁculties and
the diversities of the experiences, where the difﬁculties are
positively correlated with TD-errors and the diversities are
related to the number of replaying times [14]. However, it
introduced a number of parameters that required more prior
knowledge to tune accurately. In ReF-ER [15], policy updates
are penalized according to Kullback-Leibler divergence to
accelerate convergence, attentive experience replay (AER)
selects experiences according to the similarities between their
states and the agent’s current state [16] and CER sets up two
agents for competitive exploration between a pair of agents
[17]. But these three methods may rely on high computing
resources. Hence, it is desirable to design a more effective and
general approach to enhance the experience replaying method
for DRL.
At the same time, quantum physics have been employed to
dramatically enhance information processing capability [19]–
[26] and have a positive inﬂuence on speciﬁc algorithmic tasks
of applied artiﬁcial intelligence [27]–[30]. In particular, there
has been much interest in quantum enhancement of RL and
their applications. The idea of quantum reinforcement learning
arXiv:2101.02034v1  [cs.LG]  6 Jan 2021

2
was ﬁrst originated from introducing the characteristics of
quantum parallelism into classical RL algorithms [31], which
achieved a better trade-off between exploration and exploita-
tion and sped up the learning as well. Quantum mechanics
were found to be able to bring an overall quadratic speedup
for intelligent agents [32]. The general agent-environment
framework was also extended to the quantum domain [33].
In addition, quantum reinforcement learning with multi-qubits
was evaluated on superconducting circuits [34] and was ex-
tended to other cases such as multi-level and open quantum
systems [35]. Multiple value functions using Grover algorithm
were proved to converge in fewer iterations than their classi-
cal counterparts [36]. Recent research also demonstrated the
advantage of RL using quantum Boltzmann machines over the
classical one [37].
Inspired by quantum machine learning, we may produce
atypical patterns in data. For example, the quantum superpo-
sition state provides an exponential scale of computation space
in the n-qubits linear physical space [31], [38]. In this paper,
we propose a quantum-inspired experience replay approach
for deep reinforcement learning (DRL-QER) to improve the
training performance of DRL in a natural way without delib-
erate hyper-parameter tuning. In DRL-QER, the experiences
are expressed in quantum representations and the probability
amplitudes of the quantum representations of experiences
are iteratively manipulated by quantum operations, including
the preparation operation and the depreciation operation. In
particular, the preparation operation is designed according
to the importance of the experiences and the depreciation
operation is associated with the replaying times for the selected
experiences. With the two operations, the importance of the
experiences is distinguished and the diversity of experiences
is guaranteed. To test the proposed DRL-QER algorithm,
experiments are carried out on Gym-Atari platform with
comparison to DRL-PER and DCRL. In addition, DRL-QER
is implemented with double DQN and dueling DQN, and
the DRL-QER variants are compared with their classical
counterparts.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
introduces DRL, experience replay, and the basic concepts of
quantum computation as well. In Section III, the framework
of DRL-QER is introduced, quantum representations and
quantum operations are presented, followed by the algorithm
description of DRL-QER with speciﬁc implementation details.
In Section IV, experimental results are demonstrated to verify
the performance of the proposed DRL-QER algorithm. Con-
clusions are drawn in Section V.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. Deep Reinforcement Learning and Experience Replay
1) Markov Decision Process: The training process of re-
inforcement learning (RL) is based on the model of Markov
Decision Process, whose basic components can be described
by a tuple of ⟨S,A,P,R⟩[1], where S is the state space, A is
the action space, P : S × A × S →[0,1] is the state transition
probability and R : S×A →R is the reward function.
In the process of interaction with the environment, the agent
forms the state st ∈S at the time step t ∈[0,T] and chooses
an action at = π(st), at ∈A , where T is the terminal time
and policy π is a mapping from the state space S to the action
space A. After carrying out the action at, the agent transits
to the next state st+1 and receives a scalar reward signal rt.
Thus we obtain a transition of et = (st,at,rt,st+1) at the time
step t. RL aims at determining an optimal policy π∗so as
to maximize the cumulative discounted future rewards Rt =
∑T−t
k=0 γkrt+k, where γ ∈[0,1] is a discount factor to balance
the importance of the current rewards and the future rewards.
As a widely used RL algorithm, Q-learning deﬁnes Q(s,a) as
the expected discounted reward for executing action a at state
s following the policy π, and a look-up Q table is established
to store the Q-values [39].
2) Deep Q Network: In high-dimensional environments, it
is a general and effective approach to approximate Q(s,a)
using a neural network with parameter θ, i.e., Q(s,a;θ) ≈
Q(s,a), instead of a look-up table that stores all state-action
values Q(s,a) [39]. In order to update the parameters of the
neural network with a gradient descent method, the “true
values” y(s,a) of the state-action values Q(s,a) are estimated
from the maximum of the next state-action values Q(s′,a′),
i.e., y(s,a) = r + γ max
a′ Q(s′,a′;θ −), where θ −denotes the
parameters of the target network that are ﬁxed during the
computation of y(s,a) and are updated after some training
steps.
The temporal-difference errors (TD-errors) δ can be mea-
sured by the deviation between y(s,a) and Q(s,a) as
δ = y(s,a)−Q(s,a) = r+γ max
a′ Q(s′,a′;θ −)−Q(s,a;θ). (1)
Accordingly, the loss function Loss(θ;Q,y) to be optimized is
Loss(θ;Q,y) = 1
2(r +γ max
a′ Q(s′,a′;θ −)−Q(s,a;θ))2.
(2)
Differentiate the loss function Loss(θ;Q,y) with respect to the
parameter θ, and we obtain the gradient as
∇θLoss = [r +γ max
a′ Q(s′,a′;θ −)−Q(s,a;θ)]∇θQ(s,a;θ). (3)
3) Experience Replay: In most RL frameworks, agents
incrementally update their parameters while they observe a
stream of experiences. In the simplest form, the incoming data
are used for a single update and discarded immediately, which
brings two disadvantages: (i) strongly correlated transitions
break the i.i.d. assumption which is necessary for many
popular stochastic gradient-based algorithms; (ii) the rapid
forgetting of possibly rare experiences that are potentially
useful in the future leads to sampling inefﬁciency. A natural
solution would be to put the past experiences into a large
buffer and select a batch of samples from them for training
[12], [40], [41]. Such a process is called experience replay.
In experience replay, how to choose the experiences (transi-
tions) to be replayed plays a vital role to improve the training
performance of DRL. When putting the transition et into a
ﬁxed experience replay buffer with size M, a new index label,
k ∈{1,...,M} is assigned to it, with its priority denoted as Pk.
As such, the whole experience buffer can be regarded as a
collection of transitions as {⟨et,Pk⟩}. A complete process of
experience replay is actually a store-and-sample process, and

3
the learning process works by selecting a mini-batch samples
from the whole buffer to update the parameters of the RL
agent. The key of experience replay lies in the criterion by
which the importance of each transition is measured, i.e., to
determine Pk for each transition.
B. Quantum Computation
In quantum computation, the basic unit that carries infor-
mation is a quantum bit (also called qubit) and a qubit can
be in a superposition state of its eigenstates |0⟩and |1⟩[38],
[42], which can be written as the following form of
|ψ⟩= α|0⟩+β|1⟩,
(4)
where α and β are complex numbers satisfying |α|2 +|β|2 =
1. Quantum mechanics reveals that measuring a qubit in the
superposition state |ψ⟩leads it to collapse into one of its
eigenstates of |0⟩with probability |α|2, or |1⟩with probability
|β|2. In particular, the coefﬁcients can be written as α = ⟨0|ψ⟩
and β = ⟨1|ψ⟩, where ⟨a|b⟩represents the inner product
between |a⟩and |b⟩.
In quantum computing, unitary transformation is an essen-
tial operation on quantum systems and can transform an initial
state |ψ⟩to another state |ψ′⟩:
|ψ′⟩= U|ψ⟩,
(5)
where U satisﬁes U†U = UU† ≡I. For example, a Hadamard
gate that transforms |0⟩to (|0⟩+ |1⟩)/
√
2 and |1⟩to (|0⟩−
|1⟩)/
√
2 can be formulated as
H = 1
√
2

1
1
1
−1

.
(6)
Another signiﬁcant quantum gate is the phase gate, which
is an important element to carry out the Grover iteration
[20] for reinforcing the amplitude of the “target” item. More
discussions about quantum operations and quantum gates can
be found in [38].
Grover algorithm is one of the most important quantum
algorithms. It has been widely used in the problem of large
scale database searching and is able to locate items with the
complexity of O(
√
N) in unstructured database with high prob-
abilities. Its core idea is to represent items as a quantum system
and manipulate its state using a unitary operator in an iterative
way [20]. As one of the main operations in Grover algorithm,
Grover iteration has been successfully applied to RL methods
[31], where the action is represented in the superposition
of its possible eigen actions. Then, unitary transformation is
iteratively performed on the superposition states to change the
probability amplitudes of the “good” actions.
The state space of a composite quantum system is rep-
resented by the tensor product, denoted as N, of the state
space of each component system. For example, the composite
quantum system of two subsystems A and B can be deﬁned
on a Hilbert space H = HA ⊗HB, where HA and HB
correspond to the Hilbert space of the subsystems A and B,
respectively. Furthermore, its state |ψAB⟩may be described
by the tensor product of the states of its subsystems, i.e.,
|ψAB⟩= |ψ⟩A ⊗|ψ⟩B.
To
obtain
information
by
measuring
or
observing
a
quantum
system,
POVM
(positive-operator-valued
measure)
can
be
applied
[38].
For
an
observable
H,
there
exists
a
complete
set
of
orthogonal
projectors
n
Xh : ∑h Xh = I,Xh = X†
h ,X˜hXh = δ˜h,hXh
o
,
where
δ˜i,i
is
the Kronecker delta, Xh is the projector onto the eigenspace
of H with eigenvalue h, and we have H = ∑h hXh. The
probability of obtaining the outcome h can be calculated by
P(h) = ⟨ψ |Xh|ψ⟩.
III. DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING WITH
QUANTUM-INSPIRED EXPERIENCE REPLAY
In this section, the framework of DRL-QER is ﬁrst intro-
duced. Then quantum representations and quantum operations
using Grover iteration are designed to provide a natural and
appropriate experience replay mechanism. Finally, the imple-
mentation of the integrated DRL-QER algorithm is presented.
A. Framework of DRL-QER
In DRL-QER, quantum characteristics are borrowed to
design new manipulation methods to improve the experience
replay mechanism, which aims at providing a natural and easy-
to-use experience replay approach using quantum representa-
tions and unitary transformation for the experiences and their
importance, respectively.
Fig. 1. Framework of DRL-QER. Step 1: representing the newly generated
experience using a qubit; Step 2: performing the preparation operation on the
quantum representation with Grover iteration; Step 3: sampling experiences to
compose mini-batch data; Step 4: training the DRL agent with the mini-batch
data; Step 5: updating the quantum representation of the experience by the
new TD-error (the preparation operation) and the new number of replayed
times (the depreciation operation) and then put it back into the replay buffer.
The framework of DRL-QER is described as in Fig. 1.
During each learning iteration, the agent interacts with the
environment and obtains the transition et at time step t.
Such a transition is ﬁrst expressed in quantum representation,

4
or more precisely, the k-th qubit, where k is its index in
the buffer. Secondly, the state of the qubit evolves to a
superposition state through the preparation operation. Then,
transitions are sampled with probabilities proportional to their
importance and those selected samples compose the mini-
batch data for training the neural network. In addition, after
each training step, the amplitudes of the selected quantum
representations are manipulated by the combined unitary trans-
formation, including the preparation operation to adapt to the
new TD-errors and the depreciation operation to deal with the
replaying times of the transitions. This procedure is carried
out iteratively until the algorithm converges, whose speciﬁc
details are implemented in the following subsections.
B. Quantum Representation of Experiences
In quantum theory, a qubit can be realized by a two-level
atom, a spin system or a photon. For two-level atoms, |0⟩
can be the ground state, while |1⟩represents the excited state.
For spin systems, |0⟩can be the state of spin up, while |1⟩
represents the state of spin down. For photons, |0⟩can be
the state of horizontal polarization, while |1⟩represents the
state of vertical polarization. Here, in experience replay, one
experience can be regarded as a qubit system, and its two
eigenstates |0⟩and |1⟩represent the actions of rejecting and
accepting this experience, respectively.
During the learning process, the agent tries to interact
with its environment, which can be modeled as an MDP.
For each step t, with the current state st, the agent selects
an action at under a certain exploration policy (such as ε-
greedy), and then transfers to the next state st+1, and obtains a
reward rt. Finally, four elements together compose a transition
(st,at,rt,st+1), which is assigned a new index k to denote its
order in the experience buffer. In transforming the transition
into quantum representation, we deﬁne the action of accepting
and rejecting the transition as two eigenstates. Then, the
transition is regarded as a qubit (as shown in Fig. 2) with
its state as
|ψ(k)⟩= b(k)
0 |0⟩+b(k)
1 |1⟩,
(7)
where the coefﬁcients b(k)
0
and b(k)
1
have probability amplitude
meanings, and satisfy |b(k)
0 |2 + |b(k)
1 |2 = 1. In particular, the
probability of rejecting this transition is |b(k)
0 |2 = |⟨0|ψ(k)⟩|2
and the probability of accepting it is |b(k)
1 |2 = |⟨1|ψ(k)⟩|2. It
is worthy to note that, the coefﬁcients of the qubit are related
with the signiﬁcance of the experience. Before determining its
importance, it is practical to ﬁrst set an initial state, and let
the qubit evolve from the initial state to a desired state.
In quantum computing, a uniform state is one signiﬁcant
superposition state, and has the form as
|ψ0⟩=
√
2
2 (|0⟩+|1⟩).
(8)
It has equal probabilities for two eigenstates and means that
least knowledge is given about the state with a maximum
entropy, which makes it feasible to adopt the uniform state
as the initial state for each experience.
To adjust the probability amplitudes of the qubit state in
(7), a rotation operator, which is the basic element of Grover
iteration [20], [31], is applied with
UΦ = e−iΦY =

cos(Φ)
−sin(Φ)
sin(Φ)
cos(Φ)

,
(9)
where Φ is a real number and has the physical meaning of
rotation angle. Pauli Y operator is given as
Y ≡

0
−i
i
0

.
(10)
The operation of performing a rotation operator UΦ on a qubit
of experience is visualized in Fig. 3. The quantum system
evolves from the initial state |ψ0⟩(the green one) to the ﬁnal
state |ψ f ⟩(the blue one), under the unitary transformation
UΦ. Projecting |ψ0⟩and |ψf ⟩to the y−axis, the amplitude
of observing |1⟩increases, which reveals that the probability
of accepting the transition is slightly increased.
Since the k-th experience in the buffer has the quantum
representation form of
ψ(k)E
, the state of a memory buffer
Fig. 2.
An experience represented in a qubit system. Here, |0⟩and |1⟩
correspond to rejecting or accepting the transition. The state of such a
transition can be formulated as |ψ⟩= b(k)
0 |0⟩+ b(k)
1 |1⟩, where |b(k)
1 |2 is the
probability of accepting and |b(k)
0 |2 corresponds to the probability of rejecting.
Fig. 3.
State transition of a qubit system under unitary rotation UΦ, where
|ψ0⟩is the initial state, |ψf ⟩is the ﬁnal state.

5
which is composed of M experiences, is the tensor product of
M subsystems:
ψ total E
=
ψ(1)E
⊗
ψ(2)E
⊗...
ψ(M)E
.
(11)
C. Quantum Operations on Experiences
To deal with the quantum representations of experiences,
three sub-processes are involved, i.e., preparation operation,
depreciation operation and experience selection by quantum
observation. Firstly, the preparation operation is introduced to
steer the quantum systems towards the target states, whose
amplitudes are related to the TD-errors of the experiences.
In fact, whenever the TD-errors of the experiences have
changed, the preparation operation is performed to update their
probability amplitudes. From this respect, every time when a
suitable priority is determined, the quantum systems are to be
transferred to a new target state, which can be regarded as
a process of quantum state preparation. Hence, we call this
special operation as the preparation operation. In addition,
the depreciation operation is utilized to make sure that the
signiﬁcance of the experiences is adapted to the experience
relaying process, such as the times of the experiences’ being
visited. Another signiﬁcant operation is to select experiences
by quantum observation, to compose a mini-batch data for
training.
To adjust the amplitudes of quantum systems in a natural
and appropriate way, a Grover iteration method is adopted for
both the preparation operation and the depreciation operation.
Grover iteration is a signiﬁcant operation for dealing with
quantum states originated from classical information, and it
aims at intensifying the probabilities of the target eigenstates,
with others at equal probabilities [20], [31]. Considering that
the probabilities of experiences’ being extracted from an
experience buffer vary, we do not use the conventional method,
i.e., performing the unitary transformation on the composite
system (the whole experience buffer). Instead, Grover iteration
is conducted on a single experience with its quantum represen-
tation. This strategy helps to adaptively adjust the probability
amplitude of each transition, and therefore to circumvent the
neglect of the differences between experiences.
1) Preparation operation: To better optimize the process of
experience replay in DRL-QER, the importance of experiences
needs to be distinguished ﬁrst. Since a single rotation changes
the probability amplitude of a qubit system, we deﬁne a basic
rotation operator as
Uσ = e−iσY =

cos(σ)
−sin(σ)
sin(σ)
cos(σ)

,
(12)
where σ ∈R is a tiny rotation angle. Based on the exponential
approximation formula, i.e., UΣ = (Uσ)m with an integer m,
several iterations of unitary rotations amount to an overall
rotation on the qubits. In addition, owing to e−iσYe−i(−σ)Y = I,
the rotation in the reverse direction can be conducted with
U−1
σ
(or U†
σ). Hence, different rotations can be achieved by
performing multiple times of basic rotations in clockwise or
counterclockwise directions.
The preparation operation for a single experience (the k-
th transition in the buffer) is described in Fig. 4, where four
times of basic rotations in the counterclockwise direction are
performed on the qubit to intensify the “accepting” amplitude
of the good experience or equivalently to strength the “re-
jecting” amplitude of the bad experience. Generally, the state
evolution of such a quantum system can be expressed as
U(k)
Σ
= (Uσ)mk,
|ψ(k)
f ⟩= U(k)
Σ |ψ0⟩,
(13)
where mk represents the number of rotation times of the k-
th qubit. Considering that TD-error reveals the importance
of the transition, we associate the value of mk with its TD-
error. For transition et with TD-error δt, the priority for k-
th qubit is given as Pk = |δt| + ε and the maximum priority
of all the experiences is Pmax. To convert the priority into
the probability amplitude of the qubit, we try to map the
priority Pk to a rotation angle, which corresponds to a unitary
transformation of quantum states. In particular, Pmax is mapped
to a rotation angle Σmax, and then the angle of Pk can be
recorded as Σk = Σmax ×
Pk
Pmax . Since Grover iterations aim at
iteratively performing unitary transformations until a desired
state is achieved, Σmax is split into µ pieces, and each piece
is assigned with σ. The initial state of the qubit is assigned
with rotation angle ι, so the angle of rotation can be deﬁned
as the target angle minus the initial angle. Finally, the value
of mk reads as
mk = Floor(µ ×Pk/Pmax −ι/σ),
(14)
where µ,ι ∈R are two hyper-parameters, and Floor(x) takes
the largest integer not greater than x. In particular, the sign of
mk reﬂects the rotation direction relative to the angle of the
uniform state, i.e., π
4 . For example, when mk is a positive inte-
ger, Grover iteration works in the counterclockwise direction,
otherwise, it is conducted in the clockwise direction.
The value of σ in (13) is usually carefully set since it plays
an important role in the quantum representation of experiences.
From a convenient point of view, it is the most appropriate to
set a ﬁxed value. While from the perspective of adaptation to
different environments, associating it with the training process,
such as the TD-errors, the maximum times of experiences’
being visited and the training steps is more preferable. In
this work, we describe it with a function associated with the
training episode TE:
σ =
ζ1
1+e
TE
ζ2
,
(15)
where ζ1,ζ2 ∈R are two hyper-parameters.
By performing the same procedure to each transition, all ex-
periences will end up in their target quantum representations.
For example, for most of those valuable transitions, performing
the preparation operation in the counterclockwise direction
makes them approach |1⟩, while for those less important
experiences, the preparation operation in clockwise direction
can be deployed on their quantum representations to make
them closer to |0⟩.
2) Depreciation operation: After the process of prepara-
tion, the probabilities of selecting the experiences are closely
associated with their TD-errors. However, in actual training,
some experiences are replayed at high frequencies and may

6
result in poor learning performance, which is called over-
training, and the limited size of the replay buffer may aggra-
vate this situation [43]. In RL, over-training reveals the issue
of exploration–exploitation tradeoff [44]–[49]. Sufﬁcient ex-
ploration in the state-action space helps prevent the algorithm
being trapped in locally optimal solutions, while exploiting the
current policy helps the algorithm converge as fast as possible.
To achieve a balance between exploration and exploitation,
the sample diversity is considered to enhance the learning
performance of the agent. As such, the depreciation operation
is developed for the experiences according to the replaying
process. This is achieved by iteratively modifying their proba-
bilities once the transitions are selected, whose effect contains
and is greater than the utilization of importance-sampling
correction, which is demonstrated in the ablation experiments
in the supplementary material.
Once the experiences are selected and put back in the
memory buffer for training, their importance to the agent is
unavoidably changed, not only because their TD-errors have
been changed, but also in that they are no longer brand new
to the agent. Therefore their probability amplitudes need to be
modiﬁed. From this perspective, another unitary transforma-
tion
Uω =

cos(ω)
−sin(ω)
sin(ω)
cos(ω)

(16)
is used for the depreciation operation, with ω ∈R. In particu-
lar, it is implemented on the selected experiences using Grover
iteration. Every time the experiences have been accepted, their
quantum representations go through a unitary transformation
as follows
|ψ(k)
f ⟩←Uω|ψ(k)
f ⟩.
(17)
The value of Uω, or more precisely ω, should be adapted to
the speciﬁc scenario. In experience replay, when the buffer is
full, new transitions are orderly put in the buffer, with the
old ones replaced. Besides, the period of the experiences’
being replaced is a ﬁxed number of steps. Hence, a transition
will be kept in the buffer for ﬁxed time steps, before it is
Fig. 4. The procedure of the preparation process using Grover iterations for
the k-th qubit. |ψ0⟩is the uniform quantum state, |ψ(k)
f ⟩is the quantum state
after conducting the transformation U(k)
Σ .
replaced. In that case, during ﬁxed training steps, the total
replaying times of all the experiences are ﬁxed. A large
value of the maximum number of replaying times among
all the experiences (denoted as RTmax) reveals an uneven
replaying distribution, which means that some experiences
have outstanding priorities compared to other experiences. To
weaken this phenomena, a smaller ω helps to retain those less
important experiences; otherwise, a large depreciation factor
might result in sharp declines in the accepting probabilities of
those experiences. Hence, the value of ω is decreased with
RTmax.
In addition, ω should be adapted to the training episode
TE. In the early training stage, the importance of experiences
is ambiguous. While, after a period of training, the TD-
errors of some experiences tend to remain in large values, no
matter how many times they have been selected to update the
network. Therefore, it is feasible to “intensify” the accepting
probabilities of the experiences that have been replayed with
more times compared with others at the early training stage
and to “cool” down their accepting probabilities to avoid over-
training at the later stage. This is realized by increasing ω with
the training episode TE. Finally, the depreciation factor ω is
given as
ω =
τ1
RTmax(1+eτ2/TE),
(18)
where τ1,τ2 ∈R are two hyper-parameters.
3) Experience selection by quantum observation: To ac-
complish the training process, samples are chosen from the
buffer and fed into the network for learning. Here, we draw
from the quantum measurement principle and determine the
probabilities of experiences based on quantum observation.
For the k-th qubit in state |ψ(k)
f ⟩, observing its probability of
being accepted is |⟨1|ψ(k)
f ⟩|2, which is actually the probability
of measuring |1⟩. Then, normalizing the probability based on
all transitions, we obtain its replaying probability as
bk =
|⟨1|ψ(k)
f ⟩|2
∑i |⟨1|ψ(i)
f ⟩|2 .
(19)
The process of experience selection is summarized as in Fig.
5, where each transition has its own probability in the buffer.
Inspired by the quantum observation principle, this process
determines the probabilities of being selected among the
buffer. During the sampling process, several times of sampling
one transition from the experience buffer are performed under
ﬁxed probabilities. The sampling times are consistent with the
size of minibatch, which is set as 32 in the simulations.
Remark 1. The process of obtaining minibatch data from
the buffer with ﬁxed probabilities is a sampling process with
replacement. For each sampling process, the selected sample
is still retained in the buffer and is reset to the uniform state
after being sampled. This idea is inspired from the phenomena
that observing a quantum system makes its state collapses.
In that case, the quantum operation (i.e., the preparation
operation and the depreciation operation) on the selected
quantum experience starts from the uniform state, rather than
its previous state.

7
D. Implementation
An integrated DRL-QER algorithm is shown as in Algo-
rithm 1. During each step, the agent encounters transition
et. Considering that the newly generated transition does not
have a TD-error, we assign the maximum TD-error for it, i.e.,
δt = δmax to give it a high priority. This guarantees that every
new experience is sampled with a high priority. Then, the
transition is represented as a qubit, with its initial state as |ψ0⟩.
The preparation operation using Grover iteration is performed
on the experience until it reaches the ﬁnal state |ψ(k)
f ⟩. After
the buffer is full, transitions are sampled with probabilities
proportional to their amplitudes of quantum states, and those
selected samples compose the mini-batch data for training
the network. For the selected transitions, after being reset to
the uniform state, their corresponding quantum representations
are manipulated through the preparation operation to adapt to
new priorities, and the depreciation operation to adapt to the
replaying times. This procedure is carried out iteratively until
the algorithm converges.
Remark 2. The proposed QRL-QER method works by repre-
senting the classical information (experiences) into quantum
forms and performing quantum operations. Although it is
inspired by quantum laws, the process can be simulated on
a classical device. Hence, it is a quantum-inspired algorithm,
and does not need to be implemented on a quantum device.
Remark 3. In DRL, the buffer is to store the past experiences
and use them to update the parameters of the agent. During
this process, the agent interacts with the environment under the
new network parameters. Hence, the experiences in the buffer
should be updated after some training steps to gain a better
training effect. To achieve this, the buffer is set as a ﬁxed size
and the oldest experience is discarded to make room for the
newly produced experience (reset k = 1 in Algorithm 1) when
the buffer is full (k >= M in Algorithm 1). In addition, the
procedure of updating the parameters of the network begins
after the buffer is full, i.e., the variable LF is set True. This
Fig. 5. The observation process for experience replay. The buffer is composed
of a number of transitions, where each one is accompanied with its probability
drawn from quantum observation principle. The transitions are sampled out
from buffer according to their replaying probabilities to compose the mini-
batch data.
technique is also applied to DRL-PER and DCRL to achieve
a fair comparison in the following experiment section. In the
implementation of Algorithm 1, we set a predeﬁned value for
the maximum value of TD-error, i.e., δmax. During the whole
learning process, δmax should be updated once a larger TD-
error is found. As such, new δmax is assigned to the future
newly generated transitions to give them the highest priorities.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
To test the proposed DRL-QER algorithm, several groups of
experiments are carried out on Atari games with comparison
to two benchmark algorithms (DRL-PER and DCRL). In
addition, DRL-QER is combined with double network and
dueling network, and tested on additional experiments to verify
its performance.
A. Setup
The experiments are carried out on the widely used platform
OpenAI Gym to play Atari 2600 games [50], and the testing
games can be divided into four categories, namely shooting
games, antagonistic games, racing games and strategy games.
For all the games, the agent takes high-dimensional data
(210 × 160 colour video) as input to learn good policies.
In order to win the games, the agent has to plan over the
long-term. All the experiments are deployed on a computer

p5000, Ubuntu 16.04.5 LTS, Python.
To verify the effectiveness of DRL-QER, two baseline
algorithms including DRL-PER [13] and DCRL [14] are also
tested for comparison. The sampling method in DRL-QER
can be regarded as a generalization of that in DRL-PER.
DRL-PER samples experiences according to their TD-errors
with proportional prioritization, and this can be regarded as a
situation in which DRL-QER does not consider the inﬂuence
of over-training and discards the depreciation operation.
When deploying DRL-QER on Atari 2600 games, we adopt
a similar neural network architecture and a same hyper-
parameter setting to those in [11] and [13]. Considering the
hardware limitation, the high computational requirement and
the high time cost, we make some ﬁne-tuning on the hyper-
parameters. In order to avoid the expensive cost of training for
50 million frames, we train for 5 million frames. Generally, it
is hard and not necessary to accomplish quantum operations on
a classical computer. We need to do necessary approximation
in the simulation of DRL-QER, i.e., the states of qubit systems
are represented by two-dimensional complex vectors, and
the preparation operation and the depreciation operation are
performed in the form of unitary matrix transformation. In
addition, the normalized probabilities are stored in a special
binary heap called “sum tree”, where the value of a parent
node is the sum of all values of its children. Last but not
least, for performing necessary operations on experiences, we
introduce some hyper-parameters for the preparation factor σ
and the depreciation factor ω, and their values are provided
in Table I. Other hyper-parameters of DRL-QER are selected
by performing a grid search on the game Breakout.

8
(a) Space Invaders
(b) Carnival
(c) Breakout
(d) Freeway
(e) Beam Rider
(f) Kung-Fu Master
(g) Road Runner
(h) River Raid
(i) Enduro
(j) Ms. Pacman
(k) Kangaroo
(l) Alien
Fig. 6. Performance of DRL-QER with comparison to DRL-PER and DCRL regarding the average Q value.

9
Algorithm 1: DRL-QER Algorithm
Input: size of experience buffer M, size of mini batch N.
Initialize the preparation factor σ, the depreciation factor ω, the maximum TD-error δmax, the replayed time vector
cn = [cn1,cn2,...,cnM] =⃗0, the index in the buffer k = 1, a variable LF = False;
for TE = 1 →TrainingFrames do
Observe s1 and choose a1 ∼π(s1);
for t = 1 →T do
Observe rt,st+1 and then obtain a transition et;
if st+1 is terminal then
break;
end
Initialize the k-th qubit as the uniform state |ψ0⟩;
Set Pk = |δmax| and obtain mk according to (14);
Perform the preparation operation on k-th qubit using Grover iteration, and obtain its ﬁnal state
|ψ(k)
f ⟩= (Uσ)mk|ψ0⟩;
Store the transition et with its quantum representation |ψ(k)
f ⟩in the buffer;
if LF==True then
Determine the probabilities of the experiences by quantum observations and obtain their replaying
probabilities [b1,b2,...,bM] according to (19);
Update the preparation factor σ and the depreciation factor ω;
for j = 1 →N do
Sampling a transition with its index in the buffer as d ∈{1,2,...,M} based on [b1,b2,...,bM];
Reset the d-th qubit back to the uniform state |ψ0⟩;
Compute its TD-error δ j = rj +η maxa Qtarget(sj+1,a)−Q(sj,aj);
Obtain its priority Pd = |δj| and obtain md according to (14);
Update the replaying time cnd by cnd = cnd +1;
Conduct a complex Grover iteration process including both the preparation operation and the
depreciation operation on the experience’s quantum representation |ψ(d)
f ⟩= (Uω)cnd(Uσ)md|ψ0⟩;
Update δmax = max(δmax,|δ j|) and update RTmax = max(cn1,cn2,...,cnM);
end
Update weights θ by stochastic gradient descent;
Copy weights into target network θtarget ←θ;
Remove the k-th quantum representation of experience from the buffer and reset cnk = 0;
end
k ←k +1;
if k > M then
Set LF = True and set k = 1;
end
Choose action at+1 ∼π(st+1);
end
end
B. Experimental Results
The experiments of the twelve games are deployed to
compare the performance of DRL-PER, DCRL and DRL-
QER. Similar to DCRL [14], AER [16] and CER [17],
each simulation is run for three times to collect the average
performance for a fair comparison. After the training process,
we test the agents for 150 episodes, and the average rewards
with the standard deviation are summarized in Table II. It
is clear that DRL-QER outperforms DRL-PER in most of
the testing games. The statistical analysis also reveals that
DRL-QER and DCRL achieve a comparative performance
for the twelve games and they have different advantages in
different games. Considering the total reward metric tends to
be noisy because small changes to the weights of the DRL
agent can lead to large changes in the distribution of states
the agent visits [11], we take the estimated action-value as
the metric, which has been demonstrated to be more stable
than reward metric to reveal the training performance of DRL
methods. In particular, we divide the training phase into 125
epochs, and the average action values of the testing frames are
recorded after each training epoch. The experimental results
demonstrate that the learning progress of DRL-QER is faster
and more robust than that of DRL-PER, and is not worse than
DCRL. It is worthy to note that DRL-QER merely changes
the priorities of experiences without affecting the convergence
of the baseline DRL method [13]. However, an efﬁcient use
of samples contributes to a faster convergence under limited

10
TABLE I
HYPER-PARAMETERS ADJUSTMENTS IN NUMERICAL EXPERIMENTS
Altered Hyper-parameters
Hyper-parameter
Original Value
Altered Value
Training Frames
5×107
5×106
Preparation sub-factor ζ1
—
0.03π
Preparation sub-factor ζ2
—
2×106
Depreciation sub-factor τ1
—
π
Depreciation sub-factor τ2
—
1×106
Parameter µ of m
—
100
Parameter ι of m
—
0.25π
TABLE II
AVERAGE REWARDS PER EPISODE OF DRL-PER, DCRL AND DRL-QER
Game Name
DRL-
PER(±std)
DCRL(±std)
DRL-
QER(±std)
Alien
1270.2(±341.3)
1223.9(±297.1)
1309.3(±348.8)
Beam Rider
1448.3(±290.2)
1594.6(±302.3)
1508.2(±330.4)
Breakout
5.7(±2.1)
5.2(±1.9)
5.8(±2.8)
Carnival
1142.5(±376.2)
1235.1(±331.5)
1214.0(±413.4)
Enduro
43.0(±20.6)
44.3(±20.5)
42.7(±19.2)
Freeway
60.6(±6.6)
60.2(±5.8)
60.7(±6.3)
Kangaroo
1129.3(±291.3)
1237.3(±303.2)
1143.3(±324.6)
Kung-Fu Master
521.3(±328.8)
670.0(±434.8)
712.0(±370.9)
Ms. Pacman
1862.2(±661.8)
1918.9(±741.2)
1903.5(±735.3)
River Raid
2248.6(±626.8)
1239.5(±251.6)
1479.5(±307.5)
Road Runner
2312.7(±897.7)
3615.3(±1543.8)
3208.7(±1298.7)
Space Invaders
679.2(±321.2)
735.1(±250.8)
741.5(±317.2)
TABLE III
AVERAGE REWARDS PER EPISODE OF DRL-PER WITH DOUBLE
NETWORK AND DRL-QER WITH DOUBLE NETWORK
Game Name
DRL-PER(±std)
DRL-QER(±std)
Alien
1215.2(±392.0)
1275.0(±350.0)
Carnival
2420.5(±315.2)
2480.3(±319.2)
River Raid
1906.2(±522.6)
1870.9(±310.7)
Space Invaders
723.6(±229.9)
750.3(±262.8)
TABLE IV
AVERAGE REWARDS PER EPISODE OF DRL-PER WITH DUELING
NETWORK AND DRL-QER WITH DUELING NETWORK
Game Name
DRL-PER(±std)
DRL-QER(±std)
Alien
801.4(±131.6)
854.6(±140.3)
Carnival
1317.0(±376.5)
1367.7(±380.2)
River Raid
3249.2(±522.0)
3007.3(±456.7)
Space Invaders
756.1(±229.5)
758.8(±262.2)
training epochs. Hence, the trends of the training curves
(shown in Fig. 6) reﬂect the superiority of our method. What’s
more, DCRL involves many parameters which are difﬁcult to
ﬁne tune for different games, while DRL-QER does not require
prior knowledge to ﬁne tune parameters. In fact, the parameter
settings of DRL-QER are almost the same across the twelve
games. From this respective, DRL-QER is an effective and
general approach with enhanced performance.
C. Additional Exploratory Experiments
The proposed DRL-QER aims at taking advantage of
quantum characteristics in the experience replay mechanism.
To ﬁgure out whether this mechanism can be applied to
other memory-based RL algorithms, we further apply DRL-
QER to double network [51] and dueling network [52], and
implement experimental simulations on randomly selected 4
games using the same hyper-parameter setting in Table I. In
Fig. 7, both double DQN and dueling DQN algorithms using
the quantum-inspired experience replay (QER) method show
faster convergence regarding the average Q value compared
with their classical counterparts. The average rewards of DRL-
QER-Double and DRL-PER-Double are summarized in Table
III. Besides, the average rewards of DRL-QER-Dueling and
DRL-PER-Dueling are summarized in Table IV. From these
two tables, the average rewards per episode are also increased
in ”Double Network” and ”Dueling Network” for 3 games
except for Riverraid.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, the DRL-QER method is proposed by intro-
ducing quantum characteristics into the process of experience
replay in DRL to guarantee that the learning scheme focuses
on what the agent has learnt from the interaction with the
environment instead of the prior knowledge. In DRL-QER,
the experiences are represented in quantum states, whose
amplitudes are correlated with the TD-errors and the replaying
times. In particular, the preparation operation and the depre-
ciation operation in DRL-QER help speed up the training
progress and achieve an improved sampling efﬁciency. The
experimental results demonstrate superior performance of the
proposed DRL-QER over DRL-PER and DCRL. Comparisons
of DRL-PER and DRL-QER in dueling DQN and double
DQN further show that DRL-QER can also achieve improved
performance for other memory-based DRL algorithms. Our
future work will focus on in-depth theoretical research on the

11
(a) Alien
(b) Carnival
(c) River Raid
(d) Space Invaders
Fig. 7. Performance of DRL-QER-Double/DRL-PER-Double and DRL-QER-Dueling/DRL-PER-Dueling regarding the average Q value.
convergence of DRL-QER and quantum enhanced reinforce-
ment learning along with its applications to other continuous
control methods such as deep deterministic policy gradient
(DDPG) [53], [54] and Soft Actor Critic [55].
