ANALYZING MICRO-FOUNDED GENERAL EQUILIB-
RIUM MODELS WITH MANY AGENTS USING DEEP RE-
INFORCEMENT LEARNING
Michael Curry∗
University of Maryland

Alexander Trott, Soham Phade, Yu Bai, Stephan Zheng
Salesforce
Palo Alto, CA

ABSTRACT
Real economies can be modeled as a sequential imperfect-information game with
many heterogeneous agents, such as consumers, ﬁrms, and governments. Dynamic
general equilibrium (DGE) models are often used for macroeconomic analysis
in this setting. However, ﬁnding general equilibria is challenging using existing
theoretical or computational methods, especially when using microfoundations to
model individual agents. Here, we show how to use deep multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL) to ﬁnd ϵ-meta-equilibria over agent types in microfounded DGE
models. Whereas standard MARL fails to learn non-trivial solutions, our structured
learning curricula enable stable convergence to meaningful solutions. Concep-
tually, our approach is more ﬂexible and does not need unrealistic assumptions,
e.g., continuous market clearing, that are commonly used for analytical tractability.
Furthermore, our end-to-end GPU implementation enables fast real-time conver-
gence with a large number of RL economic agents. We showcase our approach in
open and closed real-business-cycle (RBC) models with 100 worker-consumers,
10 ﬁrms, and a social planner who taxes and redistributes. We validate the learned
solutions are ϵ-meta-equilibria through best-response analyses, show that they
align with economic intuitions, and show our approach can learn a spectrum of
qualitatively distinct ϵ-meta-equilibria in open RBC models. As such, we show
that hardware-accelerated MARL is a promising framework for modeling the
complexity of economies based on microfoundations.
1
INTRODUCTION
Real-world economies can be modeled as general-sum sequential imperfect-information games
with many heterogeneous agents (Mas-Colell et al., 1995), such as consumer-workers, ﬁrms, and
governments (or other social planners). Dynamic general equilibrium models (DGE) are workhorse
models that describe the economic incentives, interactions, and constraints of these agents, which are
often assumed to be rational.1 In particular, we are interested in DGE models with a large number
of heterogeneous, strategic agents, based on appropriate microfoundations Archibald et al. (1970);
Smets and Wouters (2007).
By ﬁnding the strategic equilibria in such games, one can study macroeconomic outcomes, such as
productivity, equality, and growth (Heer and Maussner, 2009). However, at this scale and game-
theoretic complexity, existing theoretical and computational methods often struggle to ﬁnd the
∗Research conducted while Michael Curry was an intern at Salesforce.
1One can also model more human-like behavior through instances of bounded rationality, e.g., agents that
act suboptimally or whose affordances or objectives encode cognitive biases or limits (Kahneman, 2003). In this
work, we focus on rational agents, but our framework can be generalized to using boundedly rational agents.
1
arXiv:2201.01163v2  [cs.GT]  24 Feb 2022

strategic equilibria Nisan et al. (2007); Bai et al. (2021). For a detailed exposition on DGE models
and solution methods related to our work, see Section 2. We emphasize that we focus on the
methodological challenge of ﬁnding equilibria, rather than the question of what constitute appropriate
microfoundations.
In this work, we focus on reinforcement learning as a powerful and ﬂexible methodological framework
to analyze DGE models with many agents. We propose using deep multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) Sutton and Barto (2018) as a constructive solution to explicitly ﬁnd their (approximate)
equilibria. Using MARL provides many beneﬁts: 1) large-scale deep RL has proven capable of
ﬁnding (near-)optimal behavioral policies in complex multi-agent games in various domains Vinyals
et al. (2019a); OpenAI (2018); Silver et al. (2017); 2) RL is ﬂexible: it has few analytical requirements
on the structure of the game, e.g., it can optimize policies for any scalar objective, e.g., consumer
utility function or social welfare, which does not need to be differentiable; and 3) it can optimize
rich behavioral models, e.g., deep neural networks, that can imitate complex human behaviors, e.g.,
given multi-agent behavioral data Zheng et al. (2016); Zhan et al. (2018). As such, deep MARL holds
promise as a framework to model macroeconomic outcomes based on microfoundations.
Economic Interactions Pose Learning Challenges.
Although RL offers many conceptual beneﬁts
for economic modeling, training each agent in a DGE model independently using RL often fails
due to economic interactions. This is because economic interactions introduce mechanism design
problems between agents. For example, ﬁrms choose how to set prices when interacting with a
population of consumers. Furthermore, a consumer’s purchasing power changes when ﬁrms change
wages or governments change taxes.
As such, economic interactions imply that the actions of one economic agent can dramatically change
the reward function and constraints (constituting a mechanism) of other agents. Because RL agents
learn through exploration, agents sample (sub)-optimal policies during training, which may overly
distort the rewards or constraints of other RL agents. As a result, RL agents that learn independently
(and do not account for the learning process of other agents) often fail to learn non-trivial behaviors
in DGE models. This non-stationary learning dynamic becomes especially challenging for DGE
models with a large number of heterogeneous RL agents.
Moreover, which equilibrium agents converge to (“equilibrium selection”) may depend on, e.g., the
1) world dynamics, 2) initial conditions and policies, 3) learning algorithm, and 4) policy model class.
Our framework allows us to study how these factors relate to which equilibria can be found.
1.1
OUR CONTRIBUTIONS
To address these challenges, we show how to effectively apply MARL to macroeconomic analysis:
1. To enable stable convergence of MARL with many agents, we generalize the MARL cur-
riculum learning method from Zheng et al. (2020) to structured curricula that train multiple
agent types across multiple phases. This approach yields non-trivial solutions more stably
compared to using independent training of RL agents, which often fails. We also show that
an RL social planner can improve social welfare vs ﬁxed baselines.
2. We show that our MARL approach can explicitly ﬁnd local ϵ-equilibrium strategies for the
meta-game over agent types, without approximating the DGE model. Previous solutions only
could do so implicitly or for approximations of the DGE dynamics. Here, the meta-game
equilibrium is a set of agent policies such that no agent type can unilaterally improve its
reward by more than ϵ (its best-response). Furthermore, we learn a spectrum of solutions in
open RBC economies,
3. Our approach yields new economic insights. Our approach is more ﬂexible and can ﬁnd
stable solutions in a variation of real-business-cycle (RBC) models (Pierre Danthine and
Donaldson, 1993), a family of DGE models. We ﬁnd solutions in closed and open RBC
economies, the latter has a price-taking export market. After training, the behavior of our
agents shows sensible economic behavior – for example, negative correlations of prices
with consumption, and positive correlation of wages with hours worked, over a range of
possible outcomes. Within each outcome, ﬁrms and consumers display different strategies in
response to their conditions – for example, ﬁrms with capital-intensive production functions
invest in more capital.
2

Enabling Economic Analysis with Many RL Agents.
We are particularly interested in DGE
models with a large number of heterogeneous strategic agents. To enable MARL at this scale, we
ran both simulation and RL training on a GPU using the WarpDrive framework (Lan et al., 2021).
WarpDrive accelerates MARL by orders of magnitude, e.g., by avoiding copying data unnecessarily
between CPU and GPU. In effect, this enables MARL to converge in hours (rather than days). Such
system design and implementation choices are key to enable richer economic analysis, without
resorting to approximations like representative agents Kirman (1992); Hartley and Hartley (2002) or
mean-ﬁeld methods Yang et al. (2018). In contrast, prior computational work often was limited to
training a small number of independent, strategic agents.
Using hardware acceleration to train machine learning models at larger scales has repeatedly resulted
in qualitatively new capabilities in machine learning, including some of the most spectacular results
in language modeling Brown et al. (2020) and computer vision Krizhevsky et al. (2012) in the
past decade. An essential part of each of those breakthroughs was optimizing system design and
implementation. While we don’t claim to match the impact of these results, we want to emphasize
that we see improved engineering to enable economic modeling at greater complexity and scale as
a key contribution. In the context of economic modeling, being able to learn and analyze across a
spectrum of possible outcomes and solutions is key for policymaking Haldane and Turrell (2019).
Code.
The code for this paper will be publicly available for reproducibility.
2
PRIOR WORK
We now discuss how our MARL approach contrasts with or complements prior work.
2.1
THE ECONOMICS OF DGE MODELS
DGE models study the behaviors of and interactions between consumers, ﬁrms, and perhaps a
government. The markets for goods, labor, and capital are often assumed to be competitive, with
prices set to clear the markets at each time step. Typically, consumers may work, save, and consume,
and balance these choices to maximize their total time-discounted future utility. In other words, their
decisions represent the solution to a Bellman equation. There are DGE models without Smets and
Wouters (2007) or with Kaplan et al. (2018) heterogeneity among agents.
Variations of DGE models also consider open economies with trade and ﬂows with a (large) external
economy; accordingly, closed economies lack such an external connection. Typically, they have
the same structure of market-clearing for wages, prices, and capital, but also allow consumers to
invest in foreign capital Mendoza (1991); De Groot et al. (2019). We consider both closed and open
economies: we choose to model the open case by giving ﬁrms access to an export market with an
inelastic price for goods.
2.2
MACROECONOMIC MODELING AND MICROFOUNDATIONS
Microfoundations.
Lucas and Sargent (1981) argued for an approach to macroeconomic modeling
based on microfoundations Smets and Wouters (2007). Broadly construed, microfoundations analyze
macroeconomics through models with individual self-interested strategic agents; macroeconomic
outcomes are then the aggregation of their behaviors. In particular, microfoundations address the
Lucas critique, which points out the issue of basing macroeconomic policy on historical data. That is,
historically observed aggregate patterns of behavioral responses to changes in economic policy may
not extrapolate to the future, as individuals continuously adapt their behavior to the new policy.
Conceptual Limitations of Prior DGE models.
Stiglitz (2018) discusses several limitations of
previous DGE models, including the use of inappropriate microfoundations. For instance, agents are
often assumed to be rational, have stylized decreasing marginal utilities, and maximize their expected
value in the presence of uncertainty (the rational expectations assumption), in the face of perfectly
clearing markets. However, modern DGEs often lack agent models based on behavioral economics,
for example. We emphasize that our use of MARL is agnostic to the speciﬁcations of the individual
agents, which may be rational or boundedly rational.
3

Moreover, while DGE models are based on microeconomic theory for individuals, they often do not
actually model the large number of agents as individuals. Rather, many models use representative
agents as a proxy for the aggregate behavior of, e.g., all consumers. These and other simplifying, but
restrictive assumptions make it possible to ﬁnd analytic solutions, but lead to unrealistic outcomes,
e.g., no trading. Moreover, the use of representative agents does not lead to uniqueness and stability
of equilibria Kirman (1992), a popular desideratum.
Challenges of Solving DGE Models.
Existing analytical and computational methods often struggle
to ﬁnd explicit DGE equilibria, as DGE models are typically highly nonlinear. More generally,
enumerating and selecting equilibria in general-sum games is an unsolved challenge (Bai et al., 2021).
Analytical work often simpliﬁes the DGE model’s dynamics Lucas and Sargent (1981), e.g., through
linearization. However, a linearized DGE model may have fewer or different equilibria compared to
the full DGE model, and a linearized solution may prefer one equilibrium arbitrarily when many are
possible. Furthermore, linearization may only be a good approximation around steady-state equilibria
and not be valid in the presence of large shocks, e.g., when agents change their behavior dramatically
in time (Stiglitz, 2018; Boneva et al., 2016; Atolia et al., 2010).
Formal methods, e.g., backwards induction and other dynamic programming methods, often don’t
yield explicit solutions and only implicitly characterize optimal policies (Stokey et al., 1989). For
example, in taxation, one can analyze the distortion in consumer savings or capital, the asymptotic
behavior of optimal taxes in the far future, or the tax rate on the highest-skill agent (Golosov et al.,
2011; Acemoglu et al., 2010). However, these methods generally cannot ﬁnd the full tax policy
explicitly or only describe part of it.
Computational Methods and Agent-Based Models.
A related body of work has studied agent-
based models (ABM) Bonabeau (2002); Sinitskaya and Tesfatsion (2015); Haldane and Turrell (2019).
ABMs may include a much larger range of heterogeneous agents (compared to typical DGE models),
with possibly similar microfoundations, but whose affordances and dynamics are often highly stylized.
Through repeated simulation, ABMs typically study the emergent (macroeconomic) phenomena given
simple behavioral rules for the agents, across a range of parameters. However, these studies mostly
do not address questions of ﬁnding the equilibria and optimal behaviors. Moreover, computational
methods more generally still pose technical and conceptual challenges for economic analysis Judd
(1997). Libraries exist to use numerical methods, e.g. to ﬁnd ﬁxed-point solutions Holden (2017);
Mendoza and Villalvazo (2020). However, it can be hard to distill simple or explainable economic
principles from numerically-found optimal behaviors and simulations.
2.3
REINFORCEMENT LEARNING AND ECONOMICS
Modeling Economic Agents using RL.
In the economics literature, Haldane and Turrell (2019)
observed that RL is a natural ﬁt for economic modeling. Rational economic agents maximize
their total discounted future reward, which is equivalent to the deﬁnition of an RL agent. Their
optimal behavioral policy (or simply “policy”) are characterized by the Bellman equation. The
economics literature traditionally solves such Bellman equations with methods that are only usable in
fully-known environments, e.g., value or policy function iteration Coleman (1990); Judd (1992)
In contrast, in the machine learning literature, many gradient-based RL techniques, e.g., REINFORCE
Williams (1992), implement a form of approximate dynamic programming without requiring explicit
knowledge of every environment state transition. Instead, they only require access to a simulation
of the environment and learn through trial-and-error and continuous feedback loops, making them
compatible with a larger range of modeling assumptions. Moreover, RL is compatible with modeling
policies using deep neural networks, which can model a large class of functions and asymptotically
are universal function approximators. Deep neural network policies can learn nonlinear predictive
patterns over high-dimensional state-action spaces, while deep value functions can model complex
reward function landscapes over long time horizons.
Combining these features has led to signiﬁcant successes. Notably, deep RL has achieved superhuman
performance in high-dimensional, sequential games (Silver et al., 2017), including in multi-agent
settings Vinyals et al. (2019b); OpenAI (2018). These results suggest deep MARL can learn
(approximate) strategic equilibria in complex settings. Pertinent to our setting, we do not have
4

to approximate non-linear DGE dynamics, as deep RL has been successful in highly nonlinear
environments (Tassa et al., 2018).
Economic Analysis using RL.
A small but growing number of works have explored the use of RL
for economic analysis, although deep RL is still not commonly used in economics. To our knowledge,
our work is the ﬁrst application of deep multi-agent RL to DGE models where all agents learn.
The AI Economist used two-level RL to design optimal taxes to improve social welfare in spatiotem-
poral simulations, where both agents and governments use RL policies (Zheng et al., 2020). Two-level
RL also yields interpretable economic and public health policies in pandemic simulations (Trott et al.,
2021). Danassis et al. (2021) studies harvesters who work in a common ﬁshery and a centralized
price setter, and demonstrate that an RL price setter can outperform prices found through market
equilibrium on a number of metrics, including social welfare, fairness, and sustainability. Radovic
et al. (2021) simulate oil company investments while transitioning away from hydrocarbons; they
ﬁnd that good policies for oil companies involve rapidly investing in renewable energy.
Other contemporary work includes Chen et al. (2021), which studies monetary policy with a single
representative household RL agent, and Hill et al. (2021), which learns the value function of consumers
in RBC models. These works are more limited, compared to ours. First, they use RL for one agent
type only, while the other agents (e.g., ﬁrms) use simple and ﬁxed policies. Second, they assume
markets always clear at each time step, i.e., prices are manually set to ensure supply and demand are
balanced. However, this is an unrealistic assumption and causes slow simulations, requiring solving a
nonlinear optimization problem at each timestep.
Perhaps most similar to our work is Sinitskaya and Tesfatsion (2015), which studies an economy with
homogeneous consumer-workers and price- and wage-setting ﬁrms (but no government). Here, a few
consumers and ﬁrms learn using tabular Q-learning. Even in this small-scale setting, they observe
that learning dynamics can collapse to trivial solutions with no production or consumption, similarly
to our work. Furthermore, they partially enforce market clearing by matching supply and demand for
labor and goods in a double auction, but do not enforce constraints on labor availability requirements
to produce demanded goods. In contrast, we do not enforce market clearing constraints at all, simply
rationing goods if there are not enough. Moreover, in our DGE model, consumers and ﬁrms are
heterogeneous, e.g., ﬁrms have different production functions and produce distinct goods.
Finding Equilibria in Games using Machine Learning.
Several streams of work have explored
using ML techniques to ﬁnd equilibria in games. Leibo et al. (2017) studied meta-game equilbria in
sequential social dilemmas, showing that RL policies can be segmented into those who effectively
cooperate or defect. In the domain of imperfect-information games, counterfactual regret minimiza-
tion has yielded superhuman poker bots (Brown and Sandholm, 2018). Empirical game-theoretic
analysis studies equilibria through agent simulations (Wellman, 2006), but is limited to games with
interchangable agents with identical affordances (Tuyls et al., 2018) and does not easily scale to
settings with heterogeneous agents.
In extensions of deep RL, higher-order gradients (Foerster et al., 2017) and ﬁrst-order gradient
adjustments (Balduzzi et al., 2018) have been studied to promote convergence to non-trivial equilibria.
However, these methods make strong assumptions on what agents know, e.g., that agents can see
the policy weights of other agents and/or know the full reward function, and may even change the
equilibria of the game.
2.4
THEORETICAL ANALYSIS
Different Equilibrium Types.
DGE models may support many forms of equilibria. First, assuming
all agents act simultaneously, one may analyze (repeated) Nash equilibria, where no rational agent
is incentivized to deviate unilaterally. There may also be asymmetric Stackelberg-like equilibria,
where a leader (e.g., the government) acts ﬁrst (e.g., sets taxes), and the followers (e.g., consumers
and ﬁrms) respond Zheng et al. (2020). Generally, ﬁnding all equilibria of any type in general-sum,
sequential, imperfect-information games with many agents is an open challenge (Bai et al., 2021). For
instance, with 2 or more (heterogeneous) followers, ﬁnding the Stackelberg best-response to a ﬁxed
leader requires ﬁnding multi-agent equilibria for the followers. This is computationally expensive
and there is no known provably convergent algorithm.
5

Figure 1: RBC model with consumers, ﬁrms, and governments. Arrows represent money ﬂow.
Consumer-workers earn wages through work and consume goods from ﬁrms. They also strategically
choose which ﬁrm to work for and which basket of goods to buy, but this is not explicitly visualized.
Firms produce goods, pay wages, and set a price for their goods. They also invest a ﬁxed fraction
of proﬁts to increase capital. The government taxes labor income and ﬁrm proﬁts, and redistribute
the tax revenue through subsidies to the consumer-workers. Firms can also sell goods to an external
export market, which acts as a price-taker that is willing to consume goods at any price.
Instead, we use MARL to converge to a stable solution and analyze best-responses to evaluate to
what extent it is an equilibrium. Several works have studied the use of RL techniques in such settings
(Wang et al., 2019; Trejo et al., 2016; Kamra et al., 2018; Bai et al., 2021), although do not consider
the complexity of DGE models.
Theoretical Guarantees for Convergence and Bounds on Approximate Equilibria.
Guarantees
of convergence for model-free policy optimization are difﬁcult to come by. Some theorems only
apply to tabular policies (as in Srinivasan et al. (2018), and where convergence to Nash is not even
guaranteed due to a non-sublinear regret bound). Other cases also apply only to very limited families
of games, as in Zhang et al. (2019), which deals only with zero-sum linear-quadratic games. We study
general-sum games with a large number of agents with neural network behavioral policies. All three
of these properties mean that convergence guarantees to an equilibrium are beyond the reach of theory.
To test whether a learned strategy proﬁle is at an ϵ-Nash-equilibrium, one can attempt to compute a
best-response for each agent and measure ϵ. However, the non-convexity and dimensionality of neural
network loss landscapes means that there are no perfect best-response oracles in practice. In our work,
we use single-agent RL and gradient-based optimization to see whether individual agents can improve
their utility unilaterally and hence measure ϵ. Although the found solutions and best-responses align
with economic intuitions, it is beyond the scope of this work to establish theoretical guarantees on RL
as a best-response oracle, e.g., deriving upper bounds on ϵ.
3
REAL-BUSINESS-CYCLE MODELS
RBCs are a representative DGE model in which consumers earn income from labor and buy goods,
ﬁrms produce goods using capital and labor, and the government taxes income and proﬁts (Pierre
Danthine and Donaldson, 1993), see Figure 1. RBC models are stylized and may not fully describe
reality (Summers et al., 1986). However, RBC models are a suitable environment to validate the
use of RL, as they feature heterogenous agents with nonlinear economic interactions, making it
challenging to ﬁnd equilibria. Below, we describe the RBC dynamics.
At a high level, our model includes worker-consumers, price-and-wage setting ﬁrms, and a government
who sets tax rates and redistributes. A key point about our model is that we do not assume as part of
the environment that prices and wages are set so that markets clear at each time step – that is, goods
may be overdemanded and ﬁrms are free to set prices and wages lower or higher than would balance
supply and demand. These assumptions are an essential part of the techniques used to derive analytic
solutions – avoiding this modeling choice requires using other techniques.
Agent Types.
Formally, our RBC model can be seen as a Markov Game (MG) (Littman, 1994) with
multiple agent types and partial observability. An MG has ﬁnite-length episodes with T timesteps,
where each timestep represents a quarter of 3 months. At each timestep t, we simulate
6

• ﬁrms and their goods who use the labor of the worker-consumers to each produce a different
good, indexed by i ∈I,
• consumers, indexed by j ∈J, who work and consume goods, and
• a government who sets a tax rate on income from labor and on revenue from selling goods.
Each agent iteratively receives an observation oi,t of the world state st, executes an action ai,t
sampled from its policy πi, and receives a reward ri,t. The environment state s consists formally
of all agent states and a general world state. At each timestep t, all agent simultaneously execute
actions. However, some actions only apply to the next timestep t + 1. For example, the government
sets taxes that will apply at the next timestep t + 1. These tax rates are observable by the ﬁrms and
consumer-workers at timestep t; hence, they can condition their behavioral policy in response to
the government policy. Similarly, at timestep t, ﬁrms set prices and wages that will be part of the
global state at the next t + 1. This setup is akin to, though not exactly corresponding to, a Stackelberg
leader-follower structure, where, for example, the government (leader) moves ﬁrst, and the ﬁrms and
consumer (followers) and move second (von Stackelberg et al., 2010). This typically gives a strategic
advantage to the followers: they have more information to condition their policy on.
Consumer-Workers.
Individual people both consume and work; we will refer to them as con-
sumer-workers. At each timestep t, person j works lj,t hours and consumes ci,j,t units of good i.
Each person chooses to work for a speciﬁc ﬁrm i at each timestep. Consumer-workers also (attempt
to) consume ˆci,j,t. Each ﬁrm’s good has a price pi (set by the ﬁrms, described below), and the
government also sets an income tax rate. However, consumers cannot borrow or outspend their
budget: if the cost of attempted consumption exceeds the budget, then we scale consumption so that
P
i piˆct,i,j = Bj.
Moreover, the realized consumption depends on the available inventory of goods (yi,t, described
below). The total demand for good i is ˆci,t = P
j ˆci,j,t. If there is not enough supply, we ration
goods proportionally:
ci,j,t = min

1, yi,t
ˆci,t

ˆci,j,t.
(1)
Consuming and working change a consumer’s budget Bj,t. Consumer j has labor income zj,t =
P
i li,j,twi,t; each ﬁrm pays a wage wi,t. The cost of consumption is P
i pi,t · ci,j,t Moreover, with
tax rate τt, workers pay income tax τt · zj,t; the total tax revenue Rt (which also includes taxes on the
ﬁrms, described below) is redistributed evenly back to workers. In all, consumer budgets change as:
Bt+1,j = Bj,t + (1 −τt)zj,t + Rt
|J| −
X
i
pi,t · ci,j,t.
(2)
Each consumer optimizes its behavioral policy to maximize utility:
max
πj Ec,l∼πj
"X
t
γt
c
X
i
u(ci,j,t, li,j,t, θj)
#
,
u(c, l, θ) = (c + 1)1−η −1
1 −η
−θ
2lt,
(3)
where γc is the consumer’s discount factor. The utility function is a sum of isoelastic utility over
consumption and a linear disutility of work with coefﬁcient θj that can vary between workers.
Firms.
At each timestep t, a ﬁrm receives labor from workers, produces goods, sells goods, and
may invest in capital. At each timestep t, it sets a price pt+1,i for its good and chooses a wage wt+1,i
to pay, both effective at the next timestep t + 1. If a ﬁrm invests ∆ki,t in capital, its capital increases
as ki,t+1 = ki,t + ∆ki,t. Using its capital ki,t and total labor Li,t = P
j li,j,t (hours worked), a ﬁrm
i produces Y units of good i, modeled using the production function:
Y i,t = Aik1−α
i,t Lα
i,t,
(4)
where 0 ≤α ≤1 sets the importance of capital relative to labor. Also, consumers buy Ci,t =
P
j ci,j,t units of good i. Accordingly, inventories change as yt+1,i = yi,t + Y i,t −Ci,t. Inventories
are always positive, as only actually produced goods can be consumed. The ﬁrms receive a proﬁt (or
loss) P, pay taxes on their proﬁt, and experience a change in their budget B:
P i,t = pi,tCi,t −wi,tLi,t −∆ki,t, Bt+1,i = Bi,t + (1 −σt)P i,t,
(5)
7

where σ is the corporate tax rate. The government receives σtP i,t. Firms may borrow and temporarily
be in debt (negative budget), but should have non-negative budget at the end of an episode (no-Ponzi
condition). This may allow ﬁrms to invest more, which may lead to higher future economic growth.
Each ﬁrm optimizes its behavioral policy to maximize proﬁts as in Equation 5:
max
πi Ep,w,∆k∼πi
"X
t
γt
fP (pj,t, wj,t, ∆kj,t)
#
,
(6)
where γf is the ﬁrm’s discount factor. The ﬁrm gets a negative penalty if it violates no-Ponzi.
Government.
The government, or social planner, indexed by p, sets corporate and income tax rates,
and receives total tax revenue Rt = σt
P
j zj,t + τt
P
i P i,t. As a modeling choice, this revenue is
redistributed evenly across consumer-workers; as such, the government’s budget is always 0. The
government optimizes its policy πp to maximize social welfare:
max
πp Eτ,σ∼πp
"X
t
γt
pswf (τt, σt, st)
#
,
(7)
where swf (st) is the social welfare at timestep t, and γp is the government’s discount factor. In this
work, we consider two deﬁnitions of social welfare (although many other deﬁnitions are possible): 1)
total consumer utility (after redistribution), or 2) total consumer utility and total ﬁrm proﬁt.
Open and Closed Economies via Export Markets.
We consider both open and closed economies.
In the open economy, ﬁrms can also sell goods to an external market which acts as a price-taker:
their demand does not depend on the price of a good. Operationally, export happens after worker-
consumers consume. The export market has a minimum price pexport and a cap qexport. If the price of
good i is greater than the minimum price (pi,t > pexport) then the additional export consumption is
ct,export = min(qexport, yi,t −Ci,t), at price pi,t, i.e., the exported quantity is insensitive to the price.
From a learning perspective, the export market prevents ﬁrms from seeing extremely low total demand
for their good, e.g., when prices are exorbitantly high and consumers do not want or cannot consume
the good. In such cases, an on-policy learner that represents a ﬁrm may get stuck in a suboptimal
solution with extremely high prices and no production as consumers cease to consume in response.
4
KEY SIMULATION IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
In general, experimental outcomes can depend signiﬁcantly on the implementation details; we outline
several key implementation details hereafter. In addition, all simulation and training settings can be
found in Table 1 and Table 2.
Budget Constraints.
We implement budget constraints on the consumers by proportionally scaling
down the resulting consumption of all goods to ﬁt within a consumer’s budget. Thus, the consumer
actions really represent attempted consumption – if the budget is small or stock is limited, the actual
consumption enjoyed by the consumer may be lower. Firm budgets are allowed to go negative
(borrowing money). However, because the ﬁrm’s goal is to maximize proﬁt, they are incentivized to
take actions will will be proﬁtable, increasing their budget.
Scaling of Observables.
The scales of rewards and state variables can vary widely in our simulation,
even within time steps in a single episode. If the scales of loss functions or input features are very
large or small, learning becomes difﬁcult. We directly scale rewards and some state features by
constant factors. For certain state features which have very large ranges (item stocks and budgets) we
encode each digit of the input as a separate dimension of the state vector.
GPU Implementation
We followed the WarpDrive framework (Lan et al., 2021) to simulate the
DGE model and run MARL on a single GPU. We implemented the DGE dynamics as a CUDA
kernel to leverage the parallelization capabilities of the GPU and increase the speed at which we
can collect samples. We assigned one thread per agent (consumer, ﬁrm, or government); the threads
communicate and share data using block-level shared memory. Multiple environment replicas run in
8

Parameter
Symbol
Values
Labor disutility
θ
0.01
Pareto quantile function scale parameter
-
4.0
Initial ﬁrm endowment
B
2200000
Export market minimum price
-
500
Export market maximum quantity
-
100
Production function values
α
0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8
Initial capital
K
5000 or 10000
First round wages
w
0
First round prices
p
1000
Initial inventory
y
0
Table 1: Simulation Parameters.
Parameter
Values
Learning Rate
0.001
Learning Rate (Government)
0.0005
Optimizer
Adam
Initial entropy
0.5
Minimum entropy annealing coefﬁcient
0.1
Entropy annealing decay rate
10000
Batch Size
128
Max gradient norm
2.0
PPO clipping parameter
0.1 or 0.2
PPO updates
2 or 4
Consumer reward scaling factor
5
Firm reward scaling factor
30000
Government reward scaling factor
1000
Table 2: Training Hyperparameters.
multiple blocks, allowing us to reduce variance by training on large mini-batches of rollout data. We
use PyCUDA (Kl¨ockner et al., 2012) to manage CUDA memory and compile kernels. The policy
network weights and rollout data (states, actions, and rewards) are stored in PyTorch tensors; the
CUDA kernel reads and modiﬁes these tensors using pointers to the GPU memory, thereby working
with a single source of data and avoiding slow data copying.
Implementation Details.
Furthermore, we outline several key implementation details.
• For consumers, consumption choices range from 0 to 10 units for each good and work
choices from 0 to 1040 hours in increments of 260.
• Consumers have a CRRA utility function with parameter 0.1, and a disutility of work of
0.01.
• For ﬁrms, price choices range from 0 to 2500 in units of 500; wage choices from 0 to 44 in
units of 11.
• The 10 ﬁrms are split into two groups, receiving either 5000 or 10000 units of capital. Within
these groups, ﬁrms receive a production exponent ranging from 0.2 to 0.8 in increments of
0.2. Thus each ﬁrm has a different production “technology”.
• Firms invest 10% of their available budget (if positive) in each round to increase their capital
stock.
• Government taxation choices range from 0 to 100% in units of 20%, for both income tax
and corporate tax rates.
• The government can either value only consumers when calculating its welfare (“consumer-
only”) or value welfare of both consumers and ﬁrms (“total”), with ﬁrm welfare down-
weighted by a factor of 0.0025 (to be commensurate with consumers).
• We set the minimum price at which ﬁrms are willing to export to be either 500 or 1000, and
the quota for each ﬁrm’s good to a variety of values: 10, 50, 100, or 1000.
• For consumers, consumption choices range from 0 to 10 units for each good and work
choices from 0 to 1040 hours in increments of 260.
9

Agent Observations.
The environment state s consists formally of all agent states and a general
world state. Each agent observes can observe their own information and the global state:
sglobal =
 t, {yi,t}i , {pi,t}i , {wi,t}i , {oi,t}i

.
(8)
Here yi,t is the available supply of good i, pi,t is the price, wi,t is the wage. The extra information
oi,t includes whether good i was overdemanded at the previous timestep and tax information.
In addition, consumer-workers observe private information about their own state: (Bi,t, θ) A ﬁrm
i also observes its private information: (Bi,t, ki,t, (0, . . . , 1, . . . , 0) , α), including a one-hot vector
encoding its identity and its production function shape parameter α. The government only sees the
global state.
5
REINFORCEMENT LEARNING ALGORITHM FOR A SINGLE AGENT
Firms and governments use 3-layer fully-connected neural network policies π (a|s), each layer using
128-dim features, that map states to action distributions. Consumer policies are similar, using separate
heads for each action type, i.e., the joint action distribution is factorized and depends on a shared
neural network feature ϕt(st): π(a1, a2, . . . |s) = π(a1|ϕ, s)π(a2|ϕ, s) . . . (omitting t and st for
clarity). Any correlation between actions is modeled implicitly through ϕt.
There is a single policy network for each agent type, shared across the many agents of that type.
To distinguish between agents when selecting actions, agent-speciﬁc features (parameters like the
disutility of work, production parameters, and for ﬁrms, simply a one-hot representation of the ﬁrm)
are included as part of the policy input state. Thus, despite a shared policy for each agent type,
we model some degree of heterogeneity among agents. We also learn a value function V (ϕt) for
variance reduction purposes. We compare policies trained using policy gradients (Williams, 1992) or
PPO Schulman et al. (2017).
RL parameter updates
We now describe the RL parameter updates for any given agent type.
Given a sampled trajectory of states, actions, and rewards st, at, rt for t from 0 to the end time step
T, we have the empirical return Gt = PT −t
k=0 γkrt+k+1, the total discounted future rewards from
time step t. The goal of the value function network is to accurately predict Gt from a given state st.
We use a Huber loss function ℓto ﬁt the value network, ℓ(Vβ(st) −Gt), and the value weights are
updated as βt+1 = βt −η∇β
PT
t=0 ℓ(Vβ(st) −Gt), where η is the step size for gradient descent.
Given the value function network’s predictions, we can then deﬁne the advantages At = Gt −V (st)
and their centered and standardized versions ˆAt = (At −Eπ [A]) /std(A).
For the policy gradient approach, the optimization objective for the policy is:
max
θ
Eπθ [At] + αH(πθ),
(9)
where H(π) = Eπ [−log π] is the entropy of π, α is the weight for entropy regularization (which
may be annealed over time), and πθ is the policy with parameters θ. The true policy gradient for the
ﬁrst term is Eπθ [At∇θ log πθ], which we estimate using sampled trajectories. For a single sampled
trajectory, the full policy weight update is:
θt+1 = θt −∇θ
 T
X
t=0
ˆAt log πθ(at|st) + αH(πθ(·|st))
!
,
(10)
where H(π(·|st)) is the entropy of the action distribution at a particular state. In practice, we sample
multiple trajectories and compute a mini-batch mean estimate of the true policy gradient. In addition,
we use proximal policy optimization (PPO), a more stable version of the policy gradient which uses a
surrogate importance-weighted advantage function AP P O in the policy objective:
AP P O = min
 πθ(at|st)
πold(at|st)
ˆAt, clip
 πθ(at|st)
πold(at|st)

ˆAt

,
(11)
which uses the current πθ and policy before the last update πold. Extreme values of the importance
weights πθ/πold are clipped for stability. Moreover, in practice, using the standardized advantages ˆAt
10

Algorithm 1 A single training step at time step t.
πc, vc ←consumer policy and value network
πf, vf ←ﬁrm policy and value network, prices and wages masked according to t
πg, vg ←masked government policy and value network, tax rates masked according to t
θ(t): disutility of work parameter, annealed over training steps
w(t): entropy parameter, annealed over training steps according to max(exp(
−t
decay rate), 0.1)
sc, ac, rc, sf, af, rf, sg, ag, rg ←EnvironmentSimulate(πc, πf, πg, θ(t))
πc, vc ←PPOUpdate(πc, vc, sc, ac, rc, w(t))
if t > tstart ﬁrm then
πf, vf ←PPOUpdate(πf, vf, sf, af, rf, w(t −tstart ﬁrm))
end if
if t > tstart government then
πg, vg ←PPOUpdate(πg, vg, sg, ag, rg, w(t −tstart government)
end if
Figure 2: Structured learning curricula. Colored bars show how annealing activates over time.
Consumers are always training, use a decaying entropy regularization, and increasingly experience
their labor disutility. Firms start with ﬁxed prices and wages, and are slowly allowed to change these.
Once the full price and wage range is available, ﬁrms start to train. Similarly, tax rates start at zero
and are slowly allowed to change. Once the full tax range is available, the government starts to train.
and clipping gradients to bound their ℓ2 norm also improve stability. Both simulation and RL ran on a
GPU using the WarpDrive approach (Lan et al., 2021), see Section 4, while our PPO implementation
followed Kostrikov (2018). We show pseudo-code for a single simulation and training step in
Algorithm 1.
6
STABLE MULTI-AGENT REINFORCEMENT LEARNING THROUGH
STRUCTURED CURRICULA
A key idea of our approach is the use of structured multi-agent curricula to stabilize learning, where
each individual agent uses standard RL. These curricula consist of staged training, annealing of
allowed actions, and annealing of penalty coefﬁcients, see Figure 2. This method extends the approach
used by Zheng et al. (2020).
Intuition for Structured Curricula.
We deﬁne curricula based on these observations about our
multi-agent learning problem: 1) during exploration, many actions may reduce utility, while few
actions increase utility, 2) high prices or tax rates can eliminate all gains in utility, even though the
consumer-worker did not change its policy, 3) for stable learning, agents should not adapt their policy
too quickly when experiencing large negative (changes in) utility, and 4) in a Stackelberg game, the
followers (e.g., consumers, ﬁrms) should get enough time to learn their best response to the leader’s
policy (e.g., the government). We now operationalize these intuitions below.
11

0K
50K
100K
150K
Training episode
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Consumer Reward
0K
50K
100K
150K
Training episode
-100K
-50K
0K
50K
100K
150K
Firm Reward
0K
50K
100K
150K
Training episode
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
2200
2400
Average Price ($)
0K
50K
100K
150K
Training episode
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Average Wage ($/hour)
Figure 3:
Training progress with structured curricula in an open RBC model. Curves show
averages across 3 repetitions with different random seeds. In each plot, the blue (black) vertical line
shows when the ﬁrms (government) start training, see Figure 2. Left two plots: Consumer and ﬁrm
rewards during training. All runs converged to qualitatively similar outcomes. We’ve conﬁrmed these
solutions form an approximate equilibrium under an approximate best-response analysis, see Figure
4. Once ﬁrms start training, their reward (proﬁts) signiﬁcantly increases. When the government starts
training, ﬁrms get even higher reward, as the social welfare deﬁnition includes the ﬁrms’ proﬁts.
Right two plots: Average wages and prices across ﬁrms during training. Firms increase prices
rapidly and lower wages once they start training. This comes at the expense of consumer reward
(utility). As such, this setting represents an economy in which ﬁrms have signiﬁcant economic power.
Staged Learning and Action Space Annealing.
All policies are randomly initialized. We ﬁrst
allow consumers to train, without updating the policies of other agents. Initially, ﬁrm and government
actions are completely ﬁxed; prices and wages start at non-zero levels. We then anneal the range
of ﬁrm actions without training the randomly initialized policy. This allows consumers to learn to
best respond to the full scope of prices and wages, without ﬁrms strategically responding. Once ﬁrm
action annealing is complete, we allow the ﬁrm to train jointly with the consumers. We then perform
the same process, gradually allowing the government to increase its corporate and income tax rates,
so that ﬁrms and consumers can react to a wide range of tax rates. Once the annealing process is
complete, we allow the government to train to maximize welfare.
Penalty Coefﬁcient Annealing.
In addition to the action annealing, we anneal two penalty co-
efﬁcients. First, we slowly increase the consumers’ disutility of work over time, which avoids
disincentivizing work early in the training process. Second, as each agent starts training, we assign a
high value (0.5) for the entropy coefﬁcient in their policy gradient loss, and gradually anneal it down
over time to a minimum of 0.1. This ensures that when the ﬁrm or government policies start training,
their “opponent” policies are able to learn against them without being too quickly exploited.
Many Local Equilibria and Convergence.
We expect that there are many possible solutions in
our game that our approach may converge to. Establishing convergence is difﬁcult in general-sum
games – the best results make use of regret-minimizing algorithms for the agents and only establish
convergence to coarse-correlated equilibria (Daskalakis et al., 2021). In our case, convergence is
hard to guarantee and may be only local since we use deep neural networks and can’t ensure global
optimality of our policy parameters. We don’t have theoretical bounds on the magnitude of ϵ for an
ϵ-Nash equilibrium, although empirically, the degree of possible improvement seems small across RL
approximate best-response analysis.
Our training curricula are designed to avoid trivial solutions where the economy shuts down, but it
may also introduce bias into which non-trivial solutions are reached. However, we observe a spectrum
of qualitatively different outcomes, so we see our approach as a way to explore more solutions than
are possible with simpliﬁed, e.g., linearized, models.
7
ANALYZING LEARNED STRATEGIC BEHAVIORS IN RBC MODELS
We show that our approach is sound and ﬁnds spectra of meaningful solutions of RBC models. We
analyze to what extent these solutions are RBC equilibria using an approximate best-response analysis
12

Approximate Best-Response Improvements
Figure 4: In each plot, the agent types (consumer, ﬁrm, and government) refer to cases when only that
agent type is training. Left: best-response reward improvements during training. The stacked
bar chart shows the original mean rewards (blue) and improvement after approximate best-response
training (purple). For ﬁrms and governments, the mean rewards are measured in units of 104 and 103,
respectively. We compare the best-response improvement in the middle and at the end of training.
The improvement from best-response is signiﬁcant in the middle and much less at the end, indicating
that training is closer to an equilibrium at the end. Right: outcome shifts under best-responses.
We plot ﬁrm against consumer rewards on an absolute scale at training convergence for several runs.
We then ﬁnd best-responses by further training each agent type separately. Each arrow shows the shift
in (consumer reward, ﬁrm reward) after best-response: blue for consumers best responding, red for
ﬁrms, and green for government. In the ﬁgure, we display only those arrows when rewards change by
more than 1%. At convergence, rewards for any agent type typically do not change signiﬁcantly in
this best-response analysis. This holds generally for the approximate equilibria reported in this work.
Figure 5: Mean rewards under ﬁxed and RL taxes. For ﬁrms and governments, the mean rewards
are measured in units of 104 and 103, respectively. The mean rewards for the consumers increase
with tax rates, whereas they decrease for the ﬁrms. RL taxes can improve the mean reward for both
types. For instance, RL tax policies increase social welfare (green) by almost 15% over the best ﬁxed
tax policy.
and analyze the economic relationships that emerge from the learned solutions. We study variations
of our RBC model with 100 consumers and 10 ﬁrms. For all simulation parameter settings, see Table
1. We repeated all experiments with 3 random seeds.
Structured Curricula during Training.
Figure 3 shows a representative result of training using
our structured curricula. Although all RL agents aim to improve their objective, some agents may see
13

Consumer
Firm
Government
Reward improvement under best-response
< 3%
< 10%
< 1%
Table 3: Reward improvement under best-response. Best-responses are measured at the end of
training as a fraction of the reward improvement during training, over 10 random seeds. These results
represent worst-cases: due to the stochastic nature of RL, outcomes can differ signiﬁcantly across
individual runs. In fact, we observed that besides a few anomalies, overall the improvements were in
fact less than 0.2% for consumers, 5% for ﬁrms, and 0.1% for the government.
Learned Solutions in Closed RBC Models
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Mean Consumer Reward
-3K
-2K
-1K
0K
1K
Mean Firm Reward
0.2
0.4
0.6
Mean Income Tax Rate (%)
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Mean Government Reward
0
50
100
150
200
250
Mean Hours Worked
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Mean Offered Wage
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
Mean Price
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
Mean Consumption
Figure 6:
Outcomes at convergence for the same experiments in Figure 4, under the closed
economy. Each point represents an approximate equilibrium, veriﬁed by an approximate best-
response analysis. Points of the same color and shape correspond to the same run. In this closed
economy, training often converges to solutions with low consumer reward and little production. In
particular, social welfare (government reward) does not increase with higher tax rates, average labor
does not change with wages, and consumption is unchanged with price. An exception is a solution
with signiﬁcantly higher social welfare, labor, and consumption. This suggests multiple equilibria do
exist, but non-trivial equilibria are harder to learn in the closed economy.
rewards decrease as the system converges, e.g., the consumers in Figure 3. Empirically, we found
that training collapses to trivial solutions much more often without curricula.
Best-responses and Local Equilibrium Analysis
We abstract the RBC as a normal-form meta-
game between three players representing the agent types, i.e., the consumers, ﬁrms, and government.
We test whether a set of learned policies is an ϵ-Nash equilibrium for the meta-game by evaluating
whether or not they are approximate best-responses. Recall that agents of the same type share policy
weights, but use agent-speciﬁc inputs to their policy, hence this still models heterogeneity between
agents.
To ﬁnd an approximate best-response, we train each agent type separately for a signiﬁcant number
of RL iterations, holding other agent types ﬁxed, and see to what extent this improves their reward.
This measurement provides a lower bound on the ϵ for each local equilibrium. In general, we ﬁnd
empirically that best-responses improve rewards much more at the start compared to the end of
training, see Figure 4. The best-response method found at most small improvements in agent rewards,
at the end of training, see Table 3. This suggests that the use of RL for a single agent type is a
practical method that yields meaningful results.
For practical reasons, as we consider settings with a large number of agents (e.g., 100 consumers),
we limit our analysis to evaluating meta-game best-responses. The meta-game is deﬁned over agent
types, and is different from the game over individual agents. In the meta-game, a meta-agent consist
of the agents of a single type and a meta-action consists of the policy prescribing actions for all
agents of that type. In particular, a meta-game best-response (where the best-response is over the
choice of policy shared by all agents of a given type) may not be an individual agent’s best-response.
A meta-game best-response may feature competition-coordination dynamics between agents of the
same type and may introduce both beneﬁcial or adverse effects for some individual agents. For
instance, there may be free-riders that beneﬁt from the collective performance while not putting in
effort themselves. On the other hand, aggregate demand between competing consumers for a limited
14

Learned Solutions in Open RBC Models
1
2
3
4
Mean Consumer Reward
120K
125K
130K
135K
140K
145K
150K
Mean Firm Reward
r^2 = 0.25, p=0.10
0.02
0.04
0.06
Mean Income Tax Rate (%)
3000
3200
3400
3600
3800
4000
Mean Government Reward
r^2 = 0.06, p=0.46
400
500
600
700
800
Mean Hours Worked
7.5
8.0
8.5
9.0
9.5
10.0
10.5
Mean Offered Wage
r^2 = 0.19, p=0.15
2100
2150
2200
2250
Mean Price
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Mean Consumption
r^2 = 0.73, p=0.00
Figure 7:
Outcomes at convergence for the same experiments in Figure 4, under the open
economy. Each point represents an approximate equilibrium, veriﬁed by an approximate best-
response analysis. Points of the same color and shape correspond to the same run. We learn multiple
distinct, non-trivial solutions in an open economy. Blue lines show linear regressions to the data.
Consumer and ﬁrm rewards are positively correlated (r2 = 0.25), e.g., if consumers earn more, they
can consume more, yielding higher proﬁts. Higher prices decrease mean consumption (r2 = 0.73),
lower wages decrease mean hours worked (r2 = 0.19), and there is no strong signal that higher taxes
improve social welfare (r2 = 0.06).
supply of goods may mean consumers on average lose utility. We empirically observed the latter case:
overall consumer utility sometimes decreased during the best-response analysis for the consumers.
Comparing with Baseline Government Tax Policies.
To show that our approach is sound, we
show that RL tax policies lead to improved social welfare, compared to several manually-deﬁned
ﬁxed tax-rate policies. In lieu of other potential baseline tax policy methods, which are not directly
compatible with our approach due to discretization, the lack of market clearing, and other features
of our model, these ﬁxed tax policies provide a useful baseline. Here, social welfare is deﬁned as a
weighted sum of ﬁrm and consumer rewards, as deﬁned in Section 4. As observed in Figure 7, RL
policies generate a social welfare ranging from 3000 to 4000, depending on the solution (as noted
above, multiple solutions could be reached). Compared to that, the best social welfare achieved using
ﬁxed tax rates was 3160. Figure 4 shows the social welfare achieved under various ﬁxed tax-rates,
ranging from 20% to 80%. We note that social welfare improves by almost 15% for the best solution
under RL tax policy over the best ﬁxed tax-rate policy. This shows that the RL policy can adjust taxes
across different rounds to improve average social welfare.
Analyzing Learned Solutions
Figure 6 visualizes and describes the learned solutions in open
and closed RBC economies (with and without an export market). In both cases, we ﬁnd multiple
qualitatively different solutions. In particular, learning mostly converges to mostly low-welfare
solutions in the closed economy, due to very low wages resulting in little labor, production, and
consumption. We stress that we describe these observations at the level of correlations. The RBC
dynamics lead to circular interactions, e.g., a change in wages can cause future changes in wages due
to changing consumer and hence changing ﬁrm behavior. As such, disentangling cause and effect is
beyond the scope of this work.
Relationships between Aggregate Economic Variables.
Figure 7 shows intuitive economic rela-
tionships between various aggregate economic quantities. For example, hours worked increase with
wage, and consumption decreases with increasing price. Such relationships do not exist in the closed
economy shown in Figure 6, because in most cases, the economy is stuck in a “bad” equilibrium with
very little work, production, or consumption. In such a setting, many agent actions, e.g., setting tax
rates, increasing wages or prices, simply do not have any effect, e.g., increasing labor.
Analyzing Open RBC Solutions.
The open RBC model admits a wide spectrum of qualitatively
distinct solutions with distinct outcomes (e.g., consumer utility, hours worked, prices, and taxes),
and trends that align with economic intuitions. To study the differences between outcomes, Figure
8 shows two rollouts sampled from different converged solutions, revealing qualitative similarities
along with some distinct behaviors.
15

Figure 8: Two rollouts from an open RBC model. We show actions and states for two representa-
tive runs, in blue and green respectively. Despite differences in strategies, there are many qualitatively
similar features. We observe that ﬁrms have different strategies: some set prices high and rely on
exporting goods (for example, ﬁrm 3); others set prices lower and also sell to consumers (for example,
ﬁrm 0). Consumers respond sensibly, only consuming when prices are low and mainly working when
wages are not 0. (Note that hours worked may be very low for some ﬁrms but are not necessarily 0.)
The ﬁrst 5 ﬁrms have a lower level of starting capital. Within each group, the production exponent
for labor ranges from 0.2 (higher tech, more reliance on capital) to 0.8 (lower tech, more reliance
on labor). Firms 0 and 5 have the lowest parameter of 0.2; ﬁrms 4 and 9 have the highest parameter
of 0.8. The differences in initial ﬁrm endowments as well as evolution during the episode lead to
different ﬁnal capital levels.
• In these examples, ﬁrms can proﬁt by either focusing on consumers or the export market;
they tend to set prices high at ﬁrst and sell mainly to the export market. Some ﬁrms then
lower prices halfway through the episode and begin selling to consumers.
• The consumers tend to work in intense “bursts”, and only consume when prices are lower at
the end. Note that each ﬁrm receives a non-zero number of hours of labor.
16

• Lower-technology ﬁrms, i.e., ﬁrms 3, 4, 8, and 9, whose production functions rely more on
labor, consistently set high prices and lower wages towards the end, independent of their
capital.
• Higher-technology ﬁrms lower prices over time and keep wages high. This is intuitive, as
high technology ﬁrms can produce more efﬁciently and hence face lower labor costs per
unit of production.
• The ﬁrms start with different endowments of capital and invest a ﬁxed percentage of their
proﬁts over time, with higher tech ﬁrms being more proﬁtable and thus able to sustain higher
investment in capital.
8
DISCUSSION
Economic models often assume the existence of a small number of representative agents whose
behavior is simple and analytically tractable. Economists have long understood that these assumptions
are unrealistic, and that it could be desirable to deﬁne models with more complexity and heterogeneity.
Yet once the models are no longer analytically tractable, ﬁnding solutions requires new computational
tools.
In this work, we showed how to adapt multi-agent RL to enable meaningful economic analysis of
general equilibrium models. By using these algorithmic and computational tools, it is possible to
weaken modeling assumptions and increase the scale of economic simulations and analysis.
On the other hand, there are also limitations to this approach. Daskalakis et al. (2009) showed that
computing equilibria for general-sum games is hard in terms of computational complexity, even for
simple matrix games. There are no theoretical guarantees yet that our framework can ﬁnd all equilibria
in sequential economic games. However, our best-response analysis suggests our framework does
discover meaningful local equilibria.
Thus, our hardware-accelerated MARL approach enables economic analysis with a large number of
agents allows analyzing complex economic problems in a practical way, while theoretical guarantees
are to be developed further. Hence, our current framework is at least an exploratory tool for ﬁnding
qualitatively different solutions, e.g., by varying initial conditions, environment parameters, or
conditioning sampling, and provides exciting avenues for future research.
