Engineering Cooperative Smart Things
based on Embodied Cognition
Nathalia Moraes do Nascimento
and Carlos Jos´e Pereira de Lucena
Software Engineering Laboratory (LES), Department of Informatics
Pontiﬁcal Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

Abstract—The goal of the Internet of Things (IoT) is to
transform any thing around us, such as a trash can or a street
light, into a smart thing. A smart thing has the ability of
sensing, processing, communicating and/or actuating. In order to
achieve the goal of a smart IoT application, such as minimizing
waste transportation costs or reducing energy consumption, the
smart things in the application scenario must cooperate with
each other without a centralized control. Inspired by known
approaches to design swarm of cooperative and autonomous
robots, we modeled our smart things based on the embodied
cognition concept. Each smart thing is a physical agent with
a body composed of a microcontroller, sensors and actuators,
and a brain that is represented by an artiﬁcial neural network.
This type of agent is commonly called an embodied agent. The
behavior of these embodied agents is autonomously conﬁgured
through an evolutionary algorithm that is triggered according
to the application performance. To illustrate, we have designed
three homogeneous prototypes for smart street lights based on an
evolved network. This application has shown that the proposed
approach results in a feasible way of modeling decentralized
smart things with self-developed and cooperative capabilities.
Keywords-embodied cognition; cognitive system; cognitive em-
bedded systems; evolved network; neural network; multiagent
system; smart things; internet of things; cooperative systems; self-
developed systems;emergent communication system
I. INTRODUCTION
A few years ago, Kephart and Chess (2003) [1] called the
global goal to connect trillions of computing devices to the
Internet the nightmare of ubiquitous computing. The reason
for that is that to reach this global goal requires a lot of skilled
Information Technology (IT) professionals to create millions
of lines of code, and install, conﬁgure, tune, and maintain these
devices. According to Kephart (2005) [2], in some years, IT
environments will be impossible to be administered, even by
the most skilled IT professionals.
Predicting the emergence of this problem, in 2001 the
IBM company suggested the creation of autonomic computing
[3]. IBM recognized that the only viable solution to resolve
this problem was to endow systems and the components
that comprise them with the ability to manage themselves
in accordance with high-level objectives speciﬁed by humans
[2]. Therefore, IBM proposed systems with self-developed
capabilities. The company emphasized the need of automating
IT key tasks, such as coding, conﬁguring, and maintaining
systems, based on the progress observed in the automation of
manual tasks in agriculture.
Other IT companies agreed with IBM and then generated
their own proposals [4], [5]. However, the IT Industry interest
in the development of self-management devices is not yet very
evident. As a result, not only the goal of the Internet of Things
(IoT) to connect billions of devices to the Internet has not been
reached, but also we have been experiencing the problems
previously listed by Kephart and Chess (2003) [1]. In fact,
there is a lack of software to support the development of a
huge number of different IoT applications.
In this context, we have been investigating how to create
applications based on the IoT with self-developed and coop-
erative capabilities. To this end, our approach consists in:
• Developing smart things:
– Things that are autonomous and able to execute
complex behavior without the need for centralized
control to manage their interaction.
– Things that are able to have behavior assigned at
design-time and/or at run-time.
• Providing mechanisms to allow things to self-adapt, im-
prove their own behavior and cooperate;
To reach these objectives, we previously developed a generic
software basis for IoT, which is called the “Framework for
Internet of Things” (FIoT) [6]. The framework approach
was used to develop the common requirements among IoT
applications and implement a reusable architecture [7]. We
developed FIoT according to the following directions:
1) To create autonomous things and a distributed control,
we modeled the framework based on a multiagent
approach [8]. According to Cetnarowicz et. al (1996)
[8], the active agent was invented as a basic element
from which distributed and decentralized systems could
be built. In our approach, we considered the use of
embodied agents, which is typically used to model and
control autonomous physical objects that are situated in
actual environments [9].
2) To control the things, we chose a control architecture
based on artiﬁcial neural networks [10]. A neural net-
work is a well known approach to dynamically provide
responses and automatically create a mapping of input-
arXiv:1801.04345v1  [cs.AI]  12 Jan 2018

output relations [10]. In addition, it is commonly used
as an internal controller of embodied agents [11].
3) To make things self-adaptive, we proposed the use of the
IBM control-loop [12] combined with various Machine
Learning (ML) techniques, notably supervised learning
and evolutionary algorithms [13].
As the development of smart things is part of a broader
context, a set of related aspects will be left out of the scope
of this work. Thus, the following approaches are not directly
addressed by this work: security, ontology, protocols and
scalability.
The goal of this paper is to show how FIoT can be used to
prototype physical smart things based on embodied cognition.
Previously, we modeled and simulated smart trafﬁc lights in
[6], which were tested in a simulated car trafﬁc application.
However, we only provided simulated smart things. Therefore,
we did not show how to transfer the evolved controller to
physical smart things. For instance, we created a simpler
experiment, but we will show all the steps of engineering smart
things using evolved neural networks. We will present the steps
of modeling and evolving a neural network in a simulated
environment, and the step of transferring this evolved network
to physical devices.
We present this experiment in Section IV. It presents the
experimental setup, results, and evaluation. The remainder of
this paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the
related work. Section III describes the background for the
proposed approach. The paper ends with conclusive remarks
in Section V.
II. RELATED WORK
There are some research results in the literature about smart
things, which use a kind of self-developed approach [14]–
[17]. Baresi et al. [15], for example, provide a simulation for
a smart green house scenario. In their simulation, ﬂowers are
distributed in different rooms based on speciﬁc characteristics.
If a ﬂower is sick, it will be allocated to another room
or its room’s conﬁguration will change. For this purpose,
the authors use adaptive techniques to perform discovery,
self-conﬁguration, and communication among heterogeneous
things. However, most of this research presents only simu-
lated smart things and does not show how to transfer their
approaches from a simulated smart thing to a physical one.
In [17], one of the few papers that designed a prototype for a
smart thing, the authors state that new algorithms need to be
integrated to their approach for the development of cooperative
smart things. They developed smart street lights that are not
able to interact with each other. Thus, each smart street light
makes decisions independently.
There are also some commercial applications based on smart
things [18], [19]. But they do not seem to provide things with a
self-developed capability. For example, in Apple’s HomeKit’s
[18] approach, the user needs to control and specify the
behavior of each one of the smart devices, instead of things
having the ability of acting by themselves and learning to
adapt. Very recently, IBM proposed the use of the embodied
cognition concept in its future products [20], [21] in order
to create devices featuring dynamic learning and reasoning
about how to act. Their proposed solution is to embed Watson
- an IBM platform that uses machine learning techniques,
especially neural networks - into smart things [22].
Besides the software industry starting to discuss the use of
embodied cognition to model physical devices, this approach
has been used in robotic literature for many years [9], [11],
[23], [24]. Therefore, inspired by known approaches to design
swarm of cooperative and autonomous robots, our goal has
been to adapt this approach and show that it is also feasible to
model applications based on the Internet of Things that require
smart things with self-developed and cooperative capabilities.
III. BACKGROUND
A. Embodied Agents
Embodied agents have a body and are physically situated,
that is, they are physical agents interacting not only among
themselves but also with the physical environment. They
can communicate among themselves and also with human
users. Robots, wireless devices and ubiquitous computing are
examples of embodied agents [9].
Figure 1 depicts an embodied agent according to the de-
scription presented by the Laboratory of Artiﬁcial Life and
Robotics [25] about embodied agents. They deﬁne embodied
agents as agents that have a body and are controlled by
artiﬁcial neural networks [10]. These agents use learning
techniques, such as an evolutionary algorithm, to adapt to
execute a speciﬁc task.
Fig. 1. Embodied agent model.
B. Evolving Embodied Agents
The authors in [24] describe the process for evolving em-
bodied agents using an evolutionary algorithm, such as genetic
algorithm. Accordingly, we provided a simpliﬁed ﬂowchart of
this process in Figure 2. The interested reader may consult
more extensive papers [26], [27] or our dissertation [28] (chap.
ii, sec. iii).
Normally, the use of an evolutionary algorithm in a mul-
tiagent system provides the emergence of features that were
not deﬁned at design-time, such as a communication system
[29]. While in traditional agent-based approaches the desired
behaviors are accomplished intuitively by the designer, in

evolutionary ones these are often the result of an adaptation
process that usually involves a larger number of interactions
between the agents and the environment [30].
Fig. 2. Flowchart: Evolving embodied agents.
The process of evolving an embodied agent’s neural network
can occur on-line or off-line [31]. The on-line training uses
physical devices during the evolutionary process. In such case,
an untrained neural network is loaded into a physical agent.
Then, the evolution of this neural network occurs based on
the evaluation of how this real device behaves in a speciﬁc
scenario. The off-line training evolves the neural controller in
a simulated agent [31], and then transfers the evolved neural
network to a physical agent.
The major disadvantage of executing on-line evolution is
the time of execution, since evaluating physical devices may
require much time. In addition, the training process based
on evolution can produce bad conﬁgurations for the neural
network, which could generate serious problems in particular
scenarios. Otherwise, the on-line training insures that evolved
controllers function well in real devices.
C. FIoT: A Framework for the Internet of Things
The Framework for the Internet of Things (FIoT) [6] is
an agent-based software framework that we implemented [6]
to generate application controllers for smart things through
learning algorithms. The framework does not cover the devel-
opment of environment simulators, but only the development
of smart things’ controllers.
If a researcher develops an application using FIoT, his
application will contain a Java software already equipped
with modules for detecting smart things in an environment,
assigning a controller to a particular thing, creating software
agents, collecting data from devices and supporting the com-
munication structure among agents and devices.
Some features are variable and may be selected/developed
according to the application type, as follows: (i) a control
module such as a neural network or ﬁnite state machine;
(2) an adaptive technique to train the controller; and (iii) an
evaluation process to evaluate the behavior of smart things
that are making decisions based on the controller. For example,
Table I summarizes how the “Street Light Control” application
will adhere to the proposed framework, while extending the
FIoT ﬂexible points.
TABLE I
FIOT’S FLEXIBLE POINTS
FIoT Framework
Street Light Control Application
Controller
Three Layer Neural Network
Making Evaluation
Collective Fitness Evaluation: Test a pool of
candidates to represent the network parameters.
For each candidate, it evaluates the collection
of smart street lights, comparing ﬁtness
among candidates
Controller Adaptation
Evolutionary Algorithm: Generate a pool of
candidates to represent the network parameters
IV. APPLICATION SCENARIO: SMART STREET LIGHTS
In order to evaluate our proposed approach to create self-
developed and cooperative smart things, we developed a smart
street light application. The overall goal of this application is
to reduce the energy consumption and maintain the maximum
visual comfort in illuminated areas. For this purpose, we
provided each street light with ambient brightness and motion
sensors, and an actuator to control its light intensity. In
addition, we also provided street lights with wireless commu-
nicators. Therefore, they are able to cooperate with each other
in order to establish the most evaluable routes of the passers-by
and to achieve the goal of minimizing energy consumption.
We used an evolutionary algorithm to support the design
of this system’s features automatically. By using a genetic
algorithm, we expect that a policy for controlling the street
lights, with a simple communication system among them, will
emerge from this experiment. Therefore, no system feature
such as the effect of ambient brightness on light status changes
was speciﬁed at design-time.
As we discussed, the training process can occur in a sim-
ulated or in a physical environment. However, many devices
could be damaged if we were to use real equipment, since
several conﬁgurations must be tested during the training pro-
cess. Therefore, to execute the training algorithm, we decided
to simulate how smart street lights behave in a ﬁctitious
neighborhood. After the training process, we transferred the
evolved neural network to physical devices and observed how
they behaved in a real scenario.
A. Simulating the environment
In this subsection, we describe a simulated neighborhood
scenario. Figure 3 depicts the elements that are part of the
application namely, street lights, people, nodes and edges. We
modeled our scenario as a graph, in which a node represents
a street light position and an edge represents the smallest
distance between two street lights.
The graph representing the street light network consists
of 18 nodes and 34 edges. Each node represents a street
light. In the graph, the yellow, gray, black and red triangles

Fig. 3. Simulated Neighborhood.
represent the street light status (ON/DIM/OFF/Broken Lamp).
Each edge is two-way and links two nodes. In addition, each
edge has a light intensity parameter that is the sum of the
environmental light and the brightness from the street lights in
its nodes. Our goal is to simulate different lighting in different
neighborhood areas.
People walk along different paths starting at random depar-
ture points. Their role is to complete their routes, reaching
a destination point. A person can only move if his current
and next positions are not completely dark. In addition, we
also supposed that people walk slowly if the place is partially
devoid of light. For simulation purposes, we chose four nodes
as departure points (yellow nodes) and two as destinations
(red nodes). We started with ten people in this experiment.
We also conﬁgured that 20% of the street lights lamps will go
dark during the simulation.
B. Smart Street Light
Each street light in the simulation has a micro-controller
that is used to detect the approximation of a person, interact
with the closest street light, and control its lights. A street
light can change the status of its light to ON, OFF or
DIM. Smart street lights have to execute three tasks: data
collection, decision-making and action enforcement. The ﬁrst
task consists of receiving data related to people ﬂow, ambient
brightness, data from the neighboring street lights and current
light status. To make decisions, smart street lights use a three-
layer feedforward neural network with a feedback loop [10].
Feedback occurs because one or more of the neural network’s
outputs inﬂuence the next neural network’s inputs.
C. Creating the Neural Network Controller
We used the FIoT (see Section III-C) to instantiate the three-
layer neural network controller for our smart street lights (see
Figure 4).
Fig. 4. The neural network controller for smart street lights: zeroed weights
(FIoT’s Application View).
The input layer includes four units that encode the ac-
tivation level of sensors and the previous output value of
listeningDecision. The output layer contains three output units:
(i) listeningDecision, that enables the smart lamp to receive
signals from neighboring street lights in the next cycle; (ii)
wirelessTransmitter, a signal value to be transmitted to neigh-
boring street lights; and (iii) lightDecision, that switches the
light’s OFF/DIM/ON functions.
The middle layer of the neural network has two neurons
connecting the input and output layers. These neurons provide
an association between sensors and actuators, which represent
the system policies that can change based on the neural
network conﬁguration.
D. Training the Neural Network
The weights in the neural network used by the smart
street lamps vary during the training process, as the system
applies a genetic algorithm to ﬁnd a better solution. Figure
5 depicts the simulation parameters that were used by the
evolutionary algorithm. We selected these parameters values
(i.e number of generation and tests, population size, mutation
rate, etc.) according to known experiments of evolutionary
neural networks that we found in the literature [11], [32] (see
Figure 2 - Section III-B).
Fig. 5. Conﬁguration ﬁle to evolve the neural network via genetic algorithm
using FIoT.

During the training process, the algorithm evaluates the
weight possibilities based on the energy consumption, the
number of people that ﬁnished their routes after the simulation
ends, and the total time spent by people to move during their
trip. Therefore, each weights set trial is evaluated after the
simulation ends based on the following equations:
pPeople = (completedPeople × 100)
totalPeople
(1)
pEnergy =
(totalEnergy × 100)
( 11×(timeSimulation×totalSmartLights)
10
)
(2)
pTrip =
(totalTimeTrip × 100)
(( 3×timeSimulation
(2)
) × totalPeople)
(3)
fitness = (1.0×pPeople)−(0.6×pTrip)−(0.4×pEnergy)
(4)
in which pPeople is the percentage of the number of people
that completed their routes as of the end of the simulation out
of the total number of people in the simulation; pEnergy is
the percentage of energy that was consumed by street lights
out of the maximum energy value that could be consumed
during the simulation. We also considered the use of the
wireless transmitter to calculate energy consumption; pTrip
is the percentage of the total duration time of people’s trips
out of the maximum time value that their trip could spend;
and fitness is the ﬁtness of each representation candidate
that encodes the neural network.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
1
8
15
22
29
36
43
50
57
64
71
78
85
92
99
106
113
120
127
134
141
148
155
162
169
176
183
190
197
Generations
Trainning Results -Best Individuals
BEST FITNESS
ENERGY %
TRIP %
PEOPLE %
Fig. 6. Simulation results - Most-Fit from each generation.
Normally, the performance of the most-ﬁt individual is
better than the others. Figure 6 illustrates the best individual
from each generation (i.e. the candidate with the highest
ﬁtness value). As shown, the best individuals from the gener-
ations have tend to minimize energy consumption and ﬁnd an
equilibrium between energy consumption and the trip time.
We selected the best individual from the last generation to
investigate its solution, as shown in the subsection below
(IV-D1).
1) Evaluation of the Best Candidate: After the end of the
evolutionary process, the algorithm selects the set of weights
with the highest ﬁtness (equation 4). Figure 7 depicts the
evolved neural network conﬁgured with the best set of weights
found during the evolution.
Fig. 7. The Evolved Neural Network to be used as a controller for real Street
Lights (FIoT’s Application View).
One disadvantage of using neural networks combined with
evolutionary algorithms is to understand and explain the be-
haviors that were automatically assigned by the smart things.
Therefore, we executed the simulated street lights using the
evolved network in order to generate logs and extract the
rules that are implicit in patterns of the generated input-
output mapping. To generate these logs, we used the runtime
monitoring platform proposed by Nascimento et al. [33] to test
distributed systems. After analyzing logs, we could realize the
rules that were created by the evolved neural network in order
to understand why street lights decided to communicate and
switch the lights ON. The code below exempliﬁes some of
these rules:
(I0 = 1.0 ∧I1 = 0.5 ∧I2 = 0.0 ∧I3 = 0.0) ⇒
(Out0 = 0.0 ∧Out1 = 1.0 ∧Out2 = 0.0)
(5)
(I0 = 1.0 ∧I1 = 0.5 ∧I2 = 1.0 ∧I3 = 0.0) ⇒
(Out0 = 0.0 ∧Out1 = 1.0 ∧Out2 = 0.5)
(6)
(I0 = 0.0 ∧I1 = 0.0 ∧I2 = 0.0 ∧I3 = 0.0) ⇒
(Out0 = 0.5 ∧Out1 = 0.0 ∧Out2 = 0.0)
(7)
(I0 = 1.0 ∧I1 = 0.0 ∧I2 = 0.0 ∧I3 = 0.5) ⇒
(Out0 = 0.0 ∧Out1 = 1.0 ∧Out2 = 0.5)
(8)

in which the variables are:
I0 ≡previousListeningDecision, I1 ≡lightSensor,
I2 ≡motionSensor, I3 ≡wirelessReceiver,
O0 ≡wirelessTransmitter, O1 ≡listeningDecision,
O2 ≡lightDecision
(9)
Based on the generated rules and the system execution, we
could observe that only the street lights with broken lamps
emit “0.5” by its wireless transmitter (rule 7). In addition, we
also observed that a street light that is not broken switches
its lamp ON if it detects a person’s approximation (rule 6) or
receives “0.5” from wireless receiver (rule 8) .
Discussion: Imagine if we had to codify into the physical
smart lights all of these rules that could be operated by this
evolved neural network. Using the evolved neural network, we
saved lines of code and programming time. The code size is an
important parameter in this kind of project, since it is normally
composed of devices with many resource constraints.
We provided street lights with the possibility of disabling
the feature of receiving signals from neighboring street lights.
In an initial instance, we did not consider broken lamps.
Therefore, as the action of communication increases energy
consumption, the street lights decided to disable this feature.
However, when we added broken lamps to the scenario,
during the evolutionary process, the solution of enabling a
communication system among street lights provided better
results. Therefore, as shown in the rules generated by the
evolved neural network, a smart street light takes lightSensor,
motionSensor and wirelessReceived inputs into account to
make decisions. Thus, the best solution does not ignore any
of these parameters.
One advantage of engineering physical devices based on
embodied cognition is that the found solution normally is
sufﬁciently generic. To estimate how generic is the approach,
we simulated another neighborhood with a different number of
street lights and a different conﬁguration map, then we applied
this best solution to this new scenario. The results showed that
the evolved street lights’ behavior do not vary based on the
number of street lights, and the lighting application continues
functioning well even if we disable some street lights in the
scenario.
E. Prototyping the Smart Street Light Device
As depicted in Figure 8, the prototype of the smart street
light is composed of an Arduino [34] and the following sensors
and actuators: (i) HC-SR501 (a device that detects moving
objects, particularly people. The detection distance is slightly
shorter - maximum of 7 meters); LM393 light sensor (a
device to detect the ambient brightness and light intensity);
nRF24L01 (a wireless module to allow one device to commu-
nicate with another); and (iii) LEDS (the representation of a
lamp).
We put two LEDs in this circuit. Our goal is to simulate
light intensity. Therefore, if a smart street light decides to set
its light intensity to the maximum, both LEDs will be on. If
Fig. 8. Prototyping the smart street light.
the light intensity is medium, one LED will be on and the
other LED will be off.
F. Transferring the evolved neural network to physical devices
After the neural network has been evolved, we codiﬁed it
into the Arduino. We show below the code in C++ language
that operates as a neural network inside the Arduino:
double fSigmoide(double x){
double output = 1 / (1 + exp ( x));
return output ;
}
double calculateHiddenUnitOutput (double w[4]){
double H = previousListeningDecision ∗w[0] +
lightSensor ∗w[1]+motionSensor∗w[2]+wirelessReceiver∗w[3];
double HOutput = fSigmoide(H);
return HOutput;
}
double calculateOutputDecisions (double w[2], double h0, double
h1){
double outputSum = h0∗w[0] + h1∗w[1];
double output = fSigmoide(outputSum);
return output ;
}
As we described in section IV-B, each smart street light has
to execute three tasks. Accordingly, we present below the main
parts of the C++ code that the Arduino executes to attend to
the tasks of collecting data, making decisions and enforcing
actions:
• Collecting data:
void getInputs (){
lightSensor = readLightSensor () ;
motionSensor = readMotionSensor();
previousListeningDecision = listeningDecision ;
if ( listeningDecision ==1){
receivedSignal = receiveWirelessData () ;
}
else
receivedSignal = 0;
}
• Making Decision (calculating output decisions based on
code of the evolved neural network functions - see IV-F):

double weightsH0[4] = 1.2, -0.8, 1.6, -0.5;
double weightsH1[4] = 1.6, -0.8, 1.5, -0.3;
double H0 = calculateHiddenUnitOutput(weightsH0);
double H1 = calculateHiddenUnitOutput(weightsH1);
...
double weightsTransmitterOutput [2] = -0.6, -0.2 ;
double transmitterOutput =
calculateOutputDecisions ( weightsTransmitterOutput , H0, H1);
...
double weightslisteningDecision [2] = -0.9, -0.7;
double listeningDecisionOutput =
calculateOutputDecisions ( weightslisteningDecision , H0, H1);
...
double weightslightDecision [2] = 1.7, -0.4;
double lightDecisionOutput =
calculateOutputDecisions ( weightslightDecision , H0, H1);
if ( lightDecisionOutput >threshold2){
lightDecision = 1.0;
}
else{
if ( lightDecisionOutput >threshold1){
lightDecision = 0.5;
}
else
lightDecision = 0.0;
}
• Enforcing action:
void setOutputs (){
...
sendWirelessData( transmitterSignal );
...
writeLed( lightDecision );
...
}
void writeLed(double value){
if (value == 1){
digitalWrite (ledPin , HIGH);
digitalWrite (led2Pin, HIGH);
}
else if (value == 0.5){
digitalWrite (ledPin , HIGH);
digitalWrite (led2Pin, LOW);
}
else{
digitalWrite (ledPin , LOW);
digitalWrite (led2Pin, LOW);
}
}
G. Testing Physical Smart Street Lights in a Real Scenario
In a controlled real scenario, we put three prototypes of
the smart street lights using the evolved neural network into
operation. We distributed them in the scenario as shown in
Figure 9. To compare the behavior of physical smart street
lights to the simulated ones, we also collected logs from
the Arduinos1. As we could observe, the behavior of the
physical smart street lights was similar to the simulated ones:
it switches lamps ON if it receives a signal different from
0.0 or detects the approximation of a person. However, we
cannot assure that a street light is receiving the signal from the
1All ﬁles that were generated during the development of this work, such
as genetic algorithm ﬁles, log program and arduino code, are available at
http://www.inf.puc-rio.br/˜.nnascimento/streetlight.html
1
2
3
Smart Street Light Prototype
Person
7 m
5 m
5 m
Smart Street Light Prototype
with broken lamp
Arduino with the evolved 
neural network
Fig. 9. Real Scenario where we tested a network of three smart street lights
prototypes.
closest street light. In addition, different from the simulator,
the real scenario is a distributed environment composed of
asynchronous components with different clocks. But, as we
are leading with a controlled environment with few resources,
we cannot observe signiﬁcant differences.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We believe these preliminary results are promising. We
proposed the use of the embodied cognition concept to model
smart things. To illustrate, we modeled and implemented smart
street lights. Each smart street light had sensors and actuators
to interact to the environment, and used an artiﬁcial neural
network as a internal controller. In addition, we used a genetic
algorithm to allow smart street lights to self-develop their
own behaviors through a non-supervised training. As a result,
a group of initially non-communicating smart street lights
developed a simple communication system. By communicat-
ing, the group of street lights seems to cooperate in order
to achieve collective targets. For example, to maintain the
maximum visual comfort in illuminated areas, the street lights
used communication to reduce the impact of broken lamps.
After evolving the neural controller, we designed three
homogeneous prototypes of the smart street light and trans-
ferred the evolved controller into their microcontrollers. We
put them in a real scenario and compared them to the simulated
street lights. Previously, we described, in [6], a more complex
application, but we only had provided a simulated scenario. In
this work, we showed that is possible to automatically create
and train a smart thing’s controllers using FIoT and to use it
to control physical smart things.
As an ongoing work, we need to improve the real scenario,
testing the use of the evolved network to control real street
lights in a real neighborhood. In addition, we need to develop
more realistic scenarios, taking several other environmental
parameters into account. Furthermore, since we had shown
that the use of an evolved neural network results in saving
code lines, we also need to test this experiment using micro-
controllers with fewer resources, such as battery and memory.
Another challenge from creating more realistic scenarios is
to model heterogeneous experiments, training different smart

things in the same scenario. For example, the application
of smart waste collecting will require two types of smart
things: smart trash cans and smart waste collection vehicles.
Therefore, these different types of smart things will need to
cooperate with each other in order to achieve the goal of
minimizing waste transportation costs and promoting environ-
mental sustainability.
Our next goal is to allow the system to initiate a new
learning process after the evolved network has been already
transferred to the physical smart things. Therefore, we will
change the neural network’s parameters at run-time and allow
the real smart things to adapt their behavior in the face of
changing environmental demands. For this purpose, we need
to use a simulator for wireless devices that allow our training
system to communicate with and for programming microcon-
trollers at runtime, such as Terra [35], which is a system for
programming wireless sensor network applications. Therefore,
our system will evaluate physical smart things’ behaviors
at runtime, execute adaptation in a more realistic simulated
environment via a learning algorithm, and then automatically
transfer the trained controller to the physical smart things.
The system will also need to provide some sort of “safe self-
adaptation” or normative adaptation [36] to the developer, in
which the device itself can avoid bad conﬁgurations or fall-
back to previous conﬁguration at runtime.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been supported by the Laboratory of Software
Engineering (LES) at PUC-Rio. Our thanks to CNPq, CAPES,
FAPERJ and PUC-Rio for their support through scholarships
and fellowships.
