International Journal of Artificial Intelligence and Applications (IJAIA), Vol.9, No.1, January 2018 
DOI : 10.5121/ijaia.2018.9101                                                                                                                         1 
 
A QUANTITATIVE APPROACH IN HEURISTIC 
EVALUATION OF E-COMMERCE WEBSITES 
 
Xiaosong Li, Ye Liu, Zizhou Fan and Will Li 
 
Computer Science Practice Pathway,  
Unitec Institute of Technology, Auckland, New Zealand 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
This paper presents a pilot study on developing an instrument to predict the quality of e-commerce 
websites. The 8C model was adopted as the reference model of the heuristic evaluation. Each dimension of 
the 8C was mapped into a set of quantitative website elements, selected websites were scraped to get the 
quantitative website elements, and the score of each dimension was calculated. A software was developed 
in PHP for the experiments. In the training process, 10 experiments were conducted and quantitative 
analyses were regressively conducted between the experiments. The conversion rate was used to verify the 
heuristic evaluation of an e-commerce website after each experiment. The results showed that the mapping 
revisions between the experiments improved the performance of the evaluation instrument, therefore the 
experiment process and the quantitative mapping revision guideline proposed was on the right track. The 
software resulted from the experiment 10 can serve as the aimed e-commerce website evaluation 
instrument. The experiment results and the future work have been discussed. 
 
KEYWORDS 
 
E-commerce Website, Heuristic Evaluation, Regression Experiments, 8C framework, Quantitative Analysis   
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
E-commerce websites have been increased greatly in the new era; they face many competitors. 
Research revealed that efforts put into usability design and modification improved the 
performance of usability on websites greatly [1]. To help website developers and other 
stakeholders understand how to develop e-commerce websites properly and maximize profit, 
many evaluation methods have been developed [1, 2]. One approach is called user based testing 
[1], which takes into account subjective perception, both in terms of website content and design. 
This perception varies with the expertise, the cognitive skills and the end goal of each user [1]. If 
an automatic approach is used to evaluate website content and design from the user’s perspective, 
that should standardize the evaluation process and make the evaluation consistent and objective. 
7C framework was introduced to evaluate the quality of e-commerce website content and user 
interface design [3], which is considered as a useful reference model for developers, analysts, 
managers, and executives, when designing and/or evaluating the interface channels between the 
customer and the web based application. However, it is insufficient to completely address the new 
generation of web applications [4]. Collaboration and user-generated content are important 
features in the new generation websites. The 7C framework was extended into the 8C framework 
by adding collaboration as the 8th element in the model and the meaning of each of the eight 
design elements was updated as well, so that they are effective in representing the interface 
design elements of new generation websites [4]. 
 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence and Applications (IJAIA), Vol.9, No.1, January 2018 
2 
This paper presents a pilot study on developing a software instrument to predict the quality of e-
commerce websites. The objective of the resulting instrument is to provide a meaningful 
estimation on the quality of a given e-commerce website. The 8C model was adopted as the 
reference model of the heuristic evaluation. Each dimension of the 8C model was mapped into a 
formula consisting of a set of quantitative website elements, the websites were scraped to get the 
quantitative website elements, and the score of each dimension was calculated based on the 
formula. Another formula was defined to calculate the total score for the website based on the 
scores from each dimension. 
 
A software was developed in PHP for both training and testing experiments. An experimental 
process and its quantitative mapping revision guideline were proposed and used. In the training 
process, 10 experiments were conducted and quantitative analyses were conducted regressively 
between the experiments. The conversion rate was used in this study to test and verify the 
heuristic evaluation of an e-commerce website. 100 websites from five different categories were 
selected as the training data. 7 websites ordered by the conversion rate were used as testing data 
to test the results at the end of each experiment in the training process and 15 websites ordered by 
the CR were used as the verifying data at the end of all the experiments. 
 
This paper presents the following order: Section 2 describes the related work and the method 
used; Section 3 explains the design of the experiments completed in this study. Section 4 
describes the details of the experiments conducted and the results are presented and discussed. 
Lastly, Section 5 summarises the work presented and introduces future work. 
 
2. THE RELATED WORK AND THE METHOD 
 
The heuristic evaluation method is a technique for evaluating the usability, with the inspection 
being carried out mainly by evaluators from principles established by the discipline [5]. In most 
applications the results tend to be qualitative, however, these qualitative results do not allow us to 
determine how usable it is or how it becomes an interactive system. Hence, the need for 
quantitative results may also be very necessary in order to determine the effort that would be 
needed to get a sufficiently usable system [5]. 
 
Usually when a website is evaluated against the 7C framework, similar heuristic evaluation 
method is used, where subjective perception is applied. For example, in [6], to evaluate a group of 
4 and 5-star luxury hotel websites against the 7C framework, a checklist consisting of 63 
checkpoints was developed based on research literature and expert opinions. This approach again 
could be inconsistent and subjective. An automatic approach could standardize this evaluation 
process and make it more consistent and objective. 
 
The accurate prediction of a numerical target variable is an important task in machine learning. 
Quantitative heuristic analysis has been used in machine learning to predict various values in the 
data mining and inductive rule learning communities, where a strong focus lies on the 
comprehensibility of the learned models [7]. In [7], a heuristic rule learning algorithm that learns 
regression models is used where, a region around the target value predicted by the rule is 
dynamically defined. In [8], a unified measure of web usability was used based on a multiple 
regression model, and then the estimated index is used to measure its impact on community bank 
performance. Results showed that banks with higher usability score perform significantly better 
than those with lower score. 
 
To automise the process of the heuristic evaluation, quantitative measurements should be used 
to determine the effort that would be needed to get a sufficiently usable system [5]. The 
quantitative measurements can be used to indicate how effective an e-commerce website is. In a 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence and Applications (IJAIA), Vol.9, No.1, January 2018 
3 
project described in [5], a function named USABAIPO-H was defined, the purpose was to 
process quantitative results of the heuristic evaluation. They suggested that a framework should 
integrate effective tools for measuring the usability level of the developed system. The framework 
referred to a necessary experiment carried out that will enable the framework development. To 
accomplish that, and with the aim of incorporating metrics related with heuristic evaluation, they 
have prompted a new experimental work to check the validity of the above mentioned experiment 
and, if appropriate, correct or improve the previously obtained results. They have done a 
quantitative analysis of the obtained results. Once each website is analysed and after applying a 
modified formula they introduced, the usability percentage is obtained corresponding to each 
website to give estimation on the usability level of the selected websites. Similar approach and 
process (framework) were used in our study. 
 
Heuristic evaluation is done as a systematic inspection of a user interface design for usability. The 
goal of this is to find the usability problems in the design so that they can be attended to as part of 
an iterative design process [5, 9]. This was done slightly differently in our study, quantitative 
measurements defined and implemented in our study were trying to measure how well a website 
complied with the evaluation principles used. Of course, those with low scores indicate shortages 
in some directions.    
 
In [5], the steps used by Nielsen in the heuristic evaluation [10] had been summarised as the 
following, which was integrated with the severity ratings found in [11]. It was recommended that 
these steps should be followed to make a heuristic evaluation efficient and to provide quality 
results [5, 10 and 11]. 
 
1. Prior training: The evaluator must become familiar with the interface for a few minutes 
to learn the website and to be able to carry out the heuristic evaluation agilely. 
 
2. Evaluations: The evaluator follows the set of heuristics to find deficiencies or to 
catalogue the website as usable. He can write comments. 
 
3. Rate severity: The evaluator should determine the severity of each of the problems 
encountered. It is therefore appropriate that the importance of the problems is rated. The 
three usability rating factors introduced in [11] were adopted as parameters to indicate 
how severe a problem found during the evaluation, including the frequency with which 
problems occur (common or rare?); the impact of the problem, if users are very 
affected when this happens; and the persistence of the problem. Is it a one-time problem 
that users can overcome once they know about it or will users repeatedly be bothered by 
the problem? 
 
4. Review: To analyse each of the evaluations made to present a report with all the 
problems and possible resolutions; taking into account the qualitative analysis obtained. 
 
The above steps made it easy for automatic heuristic evaluation, which were adopted in our e-
commerce website evaluation, where human experts were replaced by a self-developed software 
instrument.  
 
Prior training is very import. Instead of human experts, we need to train our software instrument 
to become an expert in the e-commerce website evaluation. In this step, simple machine learning 
techniques were used. 100 websites from five different categories (Electronics, Publishing & 
entertainment, Home and garden, Books, Industrial equipment), 20 from each category were 
selected as the training data. The initial software instrument was used to evaluate all the training 
websites in the first experiment, the results were tested against the conversion rate (CR). The 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence and Applications (IJAIA), Vol.9, No.1, January 2018 
4 
software was improved based on the test results. This process was repeated for 10 experiments, 
that is, a regression process was carried to refine (train) the software instrument, where 10 
experiments were used for the training. Conversion rate (CR) was used to test the results after 
each experiment. The resulting software instrument from 10th experiment can be used for the 
future e-commerce websites evaluation. 
 
For the evaluation step, this study considered the seven dimensions defined in the 7C framework 
and the additional dimension “collaboration” introduced in the 8C framework. For the web 2.0 
features, only those features easy to be obtained via web scraping were considered such as 
website forum, blog and Ajax. Table 1 presents the key meaning of each dimension in 8C [4]. 
The 8 dimensions introduced in the 8C framework were used as a set of heuristics (evaluation 
principles) in our study. Each dimension was mapped into a set of quantitative website elements. 
The details are given in Section 3. 
 
Table 1.  The key meaning of each dimension in 8C. 
Dimensions 
Meanings 
1: Context 
How the site is organized, and how the content is presented to the users? 
2: Content 
What are offered by the site? 
3: Community 
Non-interactive communication; Interactive communication. 
4: Customization 
Refers to the site’s ability to tailor itself (tailoring) or to be tailored. 
5: Communication 
Site-to-user communications. 
6: Connection 
Refers to the extent of formal linkage from one site to others. 
7: Commerce 
Deals with the interface that supports the various aspects of e-commerce. 
8: Collaboration 
Generally in the form of feedback forms, forums, and bulletin boards. 
 
Conversion rate (CR) is the percentage of users who take a desired action. The typical example of 
conversion rate is the percentage of website visitors who buy something on the site, For the 
purpose of managing user interface design and tracking the effectiveness of user experience 
efforts, the conversion rate is usually very important [12]. The conversion rate measures what 
happens once people are at your website, which is greatly influenced by the design and is a key 
parameter to track for assessing whether a user experience strategy is working. Lower conversion 
rates? You must be doing something wrong with the design. Higher conversion rates? You can 
praise your designers [12]. This suggests that there is a proportional relationship between the 
conversion rate of an e-commerce website and its user interface design. It is reasonable to use the 
conversion rate to measure the quality of the user interface of an e-commerce website. 
 
Measuring the user experience offers so much more than just simple observation. Metrics add 
structure to the design and evaluation process, give insight into the findings and provide 
information to the decision makers [13]. The five categories were selected from [14], where the 
CRs for 25 retail categories were listed. Electronics and Publishing & entertainment were 
associated with high level CR; Home & garden and Books were associated with middle level CR; 
and Industrial equipment were associated with low level CR.   
 
In the rating step, the score of each dimension was calculated first and then the score for the 
whole website was generated based on that. The calculations were based on the quantitative 
measurements of the website properties. The frequencies of the properties were included as well. 
The details and the formula are given in Section 3. The score of each dimension indicates how 
well the evaluated website meets with the requirements of that dimension. Low score indicates 
shortages in the dimension. 
 
For the review step, after the evaluation of a website, a summary of the scores achieved for each 
8C dimension were saved into an Excel file and the total score for the evaluated website was 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence and Applications (IJAIA), Vol.9, No.1, January 2018 
5 
saved as well. This information will be used by the users of the software instrument for 
comparison and analysis purposes. 
 
The process for our automatic heuristic evaluation of the e-commerce websites by using the final 
software instrument developed for this research is as the following: 
 
1. Start the final software instrument. 
2. Input the URL for the website to be evaluated. 
3. Run the software instrument. 
4. Download the output Excel file. 
5. Analyse the scores from the output file. 
3. THE EXPERIMENT ENVIRONMENT AND DESIGN 
 
Quantitative usability estimation is typically associated with the calculation of metrics that assess 
dimensions of software quality [5]. 
 
 
Figure 1.  The mapping management UI and the relations in a mapping  
A software written in PHP is a web application, which was developed for both training and 
testing experiments. Figure 1 shows the software mapping management user interface with the 
mapping relations between the Context dimension and the selected HTML tags/keywords in 
Experiment 7. For an e-commerce website to be experimented (evaluated), only the home page 
was considered in this study. 
 
The software supports two user roles: an administrator user and a researcher user. The 
administrator can create or modify the mappings between the website quantitative elements and 
the dimensions of 8C. The researchers can only do experiments (evaluating the given websites). 
The administrator can do the experiments as well. The software records each group of mappings 
as an experiments. A user can select any predefined experiment to perform website evaluation. 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence and Applications (IJAIA), Vol.9, No.1, January 2018 
6 
This was designed and implemented for the evaluation instrument training. The software can 
evaluate either a single website or a set of websites at once. For a single website, the URL of the 
website can be either manually typed in from an input text box or uploaded from a text file. For a 
set of websites, the URLs can be uploaded from a text file. The resulting scores are saved into an 
Excel file which can be downloaded from the web application.   
 
Two major approaches were used to identify the website quantitative elements and calculate the 
metrics for each dimension: finding keywords and scraping HTML tags, where a keyword could 
be an important text or a JavaScript/CSS keyword. Each keyword or HTML tag is associated with 
a numeric weight, which determines the importance of the relation, higher weight means more 
important. The mapping relations between each dimension and the selected keyword or HTML 
tag are defined before each experiment, which can be adjusted in the subsequent experiments 
based on the experiment results. 
 
Let NRj be the total number of the relations in a mapping between dimension j and the selected 
HTML tags/keywords; RSi be the score of relation i; Wi be the associated weight of relation i; if 
the relation i is a keyword, RSi will be Wi; if relation i is an HTML tag, RSi will be calculated by 
the following formula: 
 
Where STagNi is the number of the occurrence of the selected HTML tag for relation i; TTagNi is 
the total number of HTML tag on the selected page; Scalar is set as 100 to make the score a 
meaningful magnitude. The total score TS is the sum of the scores for all 8 dimensions in 8C 
framework. 
 
 
An experimental process and its revision guideline were proposed and used. Initially, in 
Experiment 1, only the keywords/HTML tags that can intuitively reflect the meaning of a 
dimension as defined in the 8C framework were selected as the relations for the mapping of that 
dimension heuristically. The weights for the relations also were selected in the similar way 
heuristically. 
 
Then the scores for all the training websites were calculated respectively according to formula 
(2). The training websites were ordered based on their CRs (CR) first, and then the training 
websites were ordered again based on their scores. If the score order is different from the CR 
order, the mappings for all the 8 dimensions were reviewed and revised in the following three 
aspects: 
 
1. Check if any relation score is dominating the dimension score based on the overall 
performance of the training websites, if yes, adjust the weight of that relation to make the 
relation score of a meaningful magnitude. 
 
2. Check if the score of any dimension is dominating the total score based on the overall 
performance of the training websites, if yes, scale all the scores in that dimension to make the 
dimension score of a meaningful magnitude. 
 
3. Recheck all the mappings against the 8C model and make adjustment accordingly. This may 
involve adding or deleting relations. 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence and Applications (IJAIA), Vol.9, No.1, January 2018 
7 
The above would result in the new mappings for the next experiment. This process went through 
regressively for 10 experiments. As an example, Table 2 shows the mappings for Collaboration 
dimension in Experiment 1, Experiment 6 and Experiment 8. 
Table 2.  The mapping for Collaboration in three experiments. 
Experiment 1 
Experiment 6 
Experiment 8 
Relation 
Name 
Relation 
Weight 
Relation Name
Relation 
Weight 
Relation Name
Relation 
Weight 
Forums
3
Forums
3
Forums
3
Bulletin boards
3
Bulletin boards
3
Bulletin boards
3
FAQ
3
FAQ
3
FAQ
3
Feedback
5
Feedback
5
Review
5
Suggestion
5
Comment
5
 
4. THE EXPERIMENT RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
100 websites from five different categories (Electronics, Publishing & entertainment, Home and 
garden, Books, Industrial equipment), 20 from each category were selected as the training data. 
The five categories were selected from [14], where the CRs for 25 retail categories were listed. 
Electronics and Publishing & entertainment were associated with high level CR; Home & 
garden and Books were associated with middle level CR; and Industrial equipment were 
associated with low level CR. 
Table 3.  The categories of training data. 
Categories 
Conversion Rates 
Electronics 
Around 23% 
Publishing & entertainment 
Around 20% 
Home & garden 
Around 14% 
Books 
Around 13% 
Industrial equipment 
Around 7% 
 
The top 10 e-commerce websites based on CR for 2010 were listed in [15], only 7 of them were 
valid for the experiments, and they all were used to test the results at the end of each experiment 
for all the 10 experiments. Table 4 shows the 7 testing websites. 
 
Table 4.  The testing data. 
Website Names 
Conversion Rates 
Woman Within
25.3%
Blair
20.4%
1800petmeds
17.7%
qvc
16%
ProFlowers
15.8%
Oriental Trading Company
14.9%
Roamans
14.4%
 
After each experiment, the training websites were ordered again based on their scores. If the score 
order is different from the CR order, the mappings for all the 8 dimensions in 8C model were 
reviewed and then revised if needed, this resulted in the new mapping for the next experiment. 
Figure 2 shows the absolute score differences between the expected order and the actual order. 
[12] suggests that there is a proportional relationship between the CR of an e-commerce website 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence and Applications (IJAIA), Vol.9, No.1, January 2018 
8 
and its user interface design. It is reasonable to assume that the less the difference, the more 
accurate the evaluation. 
 
Figure 2.  The absolute score differences between the expected order and the actual order for one 
experiment  
 
The differences in each experiment for all the 7 training websites were averaged and Figure 3 
shows the average for all the experiments except Experiment 9. As the scores of Experiment 10 
were obtained by scaling the scores in Experiment 9 by 10%. It was observed that the trends of 
the curve going down along the experiments. This suggested that the mapping revisions between 
the experiments improved the performance of the evaluation instrument and it is positive. 
 
 
Figure 3.  The average absolute difference between expected and actual outcomes for nine experiments  
Table 5.  The dimension contribution analysis of Experiment 8 & 10. 
 
Experiment 8 
Experiment 10 
Attribute 
Category 
Attribute
Number  
Contribution 
to the total 
score 
Standard 
deviation 
Attribute
Number  
Contribution 
to the total 
score 
Standard 
deviation 
Context 
28 
40.94% 
15.43 
28 
14.71%  
1.55 
Content 
11 
5.93% 
7.08 
11 
8.21% 
2.62 
Community 
18 
9.04% 
7.77 
18 
12.60% 
3.13 
Customization 
5 
7.85% 
6.00 
5 
11.22% 
2.43 
Communication 
13 
12.47% 
6.55 
13 
17.79% 
2.65 
Connection 
2 
5.15% 
4.81 
2 
7.44% 
1.97 
Commerce 
10 
14.68% 
8.30 
10 
15.80% 
2.55 
Collaboration 
7 
3.93% 
3.94 
7 
12.22% 
3.48 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence and Applications (IJAIA), Vol.9, No.1, January 2018 
9 
In Experiment 8, it was observed that some of the dimensions’ scores dominated the total score 
of the website. Table 5 shows the dimension contribution analysis of Experiment 8 & 10, where 
the number of attributes number is the number of relations in the mapping for each dimension 
(Attribute Category) of the 8C; contribution to the total score is the sum of the scores in a 
dimension for all the training websites divided by the total score of all the training websites in an 
experiment. Context made much more contribution (40.94%) than the others did. On the other 
hand, some were too small to influence the total score, such as Content (5.93%) Connection 
(5.93%) and Collaboration (5.93%).  
 
The standard deviation can provide some ideas on whether the attributes in a dimension is 
informative. For example, standard deviation for Collaboration was the smallest one in 
Experiment 8, however, there were 7 attributes in this dimension. This suggested that the 
meaning of the attributes might be overlapping. So standard deviation for each dimension over all 
the training websites should be considered in the review process after each experiment in the 
future study. 
 
In this study, scaling the scores for the dimensions were attempted to balance the influences of all 
the dimensions. For a website, let TS be its total score, and let score codes and scale parameter 
codes be defined in Table 6. 
 
Table 6.  Codes used in the scale formula. 
Score 
Code 
Meaning of the code 
Scale 
Parameter 
Scale Number 
SC1 
Score of Context 
P1 
1 
SC2 
Score of Content 
P2 
4 
SC3 
Score of Community 
P3 
4 
SC4 
Score of Customization 
P4 
4 
SC5 
Score of Communication 
P5 
4 
SC6 
Score of Connection 
P6 
4 
SC7 
Score of Commerce 
P7 
3 
SC8 
Score of Collaboration 
P8 
9 
 
Formula (3) was used to calculate TS in Experiment 9, the resulting scores were much larger than 
the other experiments, so the results were divided by 10 for further scaling, which were recorded 
as Experiment 10. 
 
 
The right side of Table 5 shows the contribution of each dimension after the scaling in 
Experiment 10. This time the contributions of the dimensions are much balanced. 
The verifying data was obtained from [16], which listed top 15 e-commerce websites based on 
CR for 2014. All of them were valid for the experiments and were used to check the mappings 
used in all the experiments except Experiment 9 as Experiment 10 can represent Experiment 9.  
Table 7 shows the order of the 15 verifying websites. Figure 4 shows the average absolute 
difference between expected and actual outcomes for the 15 verifying websites. It was observed 
that the trend of the curve was going down along the experiments, which was consistent with the 
testing results of Figure 3. This suggested that the experiments were on the right track and the 
results were positive. The resulting instrument from Experiment 10 could be used to evaluate a 
given e-commence website and provide meaningful estimation on the quality of the website. 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence and Applications (IJAIA), Vol.9, No.1, January 2018 
10 
Table 7.  The 2014 data. 
Website Names 
Conversion Rates 
Play.Google 
30.00% 
MovieMars 
22.95% 
DollarShaveClub 
20.00% 
1800Contacts 
18.40% 
1800Flowers 
16.90% 
Coastal 
14.50% 
Keurig 
13.00% 
FTD 
11.70% 
ProFlowers 
11.70% 
PureFormulas 
10.74% 
FreshDirect 
10.50% 
TheGreatCourses 
10.04% 
1800PetMeds 
10.00% 
AmeriMark 
10.00% 
OvernightPrints 
9.95% 
    
 
Figure 4.  The average absolute difference between expected and actual outcomes for 2014 data.  
Table 8.  The average score of each category in each experiment. 
No 
Electronics 
Entertainment 
Home 
Books 
Industrial 
1
165.27
142.92
157.36
152.41
148.19
2
144.16
124.11
124.71
129.84
124.40
3
108.77
83.19
85.73
93.20
88.15
4
98.73
85.15
90.07
91.09
94.00
5
90.08
77.28
82.28
87.61
83.50
6
91.27
81.50
84.73
86.80
89.00
7
163.41
141.10
145.65
136.69
148.75
8
159.83
138.54
142.54
134.37
145.52
9
467.53
395.98
380.85
358.28
403.04
10
46.77
39.89
40.21
36.00
40.34
 
Table 8 shows the average score of each category in each experiment. According to Table 3, 
websites in Electronics category should have the highest scores; websites in Industrial 
Equipment category should have the lowest scores; and Books are in the middle. In Table 8, the 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence and Applications (IJAIA), Vol.9, No.1, January 2018 
11 
Electronics websites always have the highest score in all the experiments, Books websites are in 
the middle sometimes, particularly in Experiment 10. These are consistent between the two tables 
(Table 3 and Table 8). However, Industrial Equipment websites usually do not have the lowest 
scores. This suggests that the website design and usability could have an impact on an e-
commerce website’s CR, however, there are other factors as well, such as the product nature, and 
those relevant factors should be taken into consideration as well in an e-commerce website 
evaluation. In addition, the experiment results are dynamic; they are impacted by the network 
environment. The quantitative mappings might not be available temporarily for those popular 
websites due to heavy network traffic sometimes, and those popular websites are likely the 
websites with high scores. Industrial Equipment websites are not as popular as book websites or 
entertainment websites, so they are less impacted by network traffic; on the other hand, book 
websites or entertainment websites might get lower scores than their real scores due to network 
traffic, this issue should be addressed in the future experiment. 
 
5. SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK 
 
This paper presented a pilot study on developing an instrument to predict the quality of e-
commerce websites. The objective is to provide a meaningful estimation of a given e-commerce 
website. The 8C model was adopted as the reference model of the heuristic evaluation. Each 
dimension of the 8C was mapped into quantitative elements by means of web scraping. A 
software was developed in PHP for both training and testing experiments. 10 experiments were 
conducted and quantitative analysis was regressively conducted between the experiments. The 
conversion rate was used to test and verify the heuristic evaluation. It was observed that the trends 
of the curve for the differences between the expected and actual outcomes was going down 
along the experiments for both of the testing data and verifying data. This suggested that the 
mapping revisions between the experiments improved the performance of the evaluation 
instrument, therefore the experiment process and the revision guideline proposed in Section 2 
were on the right track. 
 
However, there are limitations in this study. The experiments only had been done on the home 
page of each website, although home page is very important for a website and it can provide rich 
information about the website, it is not sufficient for an e-commerce website, in some cases, the 
shopping cart or product list are not on the home page. Due to technique incapacity, not all the 
website features can be mapped into quantitative elements. The experiment results could be 
impacted by the network environment although that impact is not significant. 
 
The above should be considered in the future work. In addition to that, the mapping revision 
process could be more robotic by improving the revision guideline (algorithm), for example, the 
standard deviation for each dimension over all the training websites could be considered in the 
review process after each experiment in the future work. The evaluation framework should not be 
limited to the 8C model; it could be extended to include other factors. [16] proposed a number of 
ways to improve the CR of an e-commerce website, which should be considered in the future 
study. 
 
Furthermore, for the outcome software instrument, only the scores of each dimension in the 8C 
model and the total score were output as the website evaluation results. An automatic analysis on 
the scores could be done and an analysis report could be produced in the future to make the 
results more comprehensive and helpful.  
 
 
 
 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence and Applications (IJAIA), Vol.9, No.1, January 2018 
12
