arXiv:1502.05838v1  [cs.AI]  20 Feb 2015
Automated Reasoning for Robot Ethics⋆
Ulrich Furbach1, Claudia Schon1 and Frieder Stolzenburg2

Abstract. Deontic logic is a very well researched branch of mathemati-
cal logic and philosophy. Various kinds of deontic logics are considered for
diﬀerent application domains like argumentation theory, legal reasoning,
and acts in multi-agent systems. In this paper, we show how standard
deontic logic can be used to model ethical codes for multi-agent systems.
Furthermore we show how Hyper, a high performance theorem prover,
can be used to prove properties of these ethical codes.
1
Introduction
Deontic logic is a very well researched branch of mathematical logic and phi-
losophy. Various kinds of deontic logics are considered for diﬀerent application
domains like argumentation theory, legal reasoning, and acts in multi-agent sys-
tems [8].
This paper applies automated reasoning in standard deontic logic (SDL) to a
problem in multi-agent systems. For this, we follow the example from [5] where
reasoning with ethical codes is presented. Instead of implementing a reasoning
system for deontic logic directly, we rely on the ﬁrst order reasoning system
Hyper [14], which uses the hypertableau calculus from [3]. This has the advantage
that reasoning in deontic logic can be embedded easily into other applications
for which Hyper is already an inference system (e.g. the LogAnswer system [6]).
SDL corresponds to the modal logic K with a seriality axiom. Due to the
fact that modal logic K is (more or less) a notational variant of description logic
ALC, deontic logic can be translated into it [7]. Since Hyper oﬀers a decision
procedure for various description logics, it can be employed for reasoning in SDL.
In Section 2 we shortly depict the reasoning framework, and in Section 3 we
show how to model our small example. This hopefully documents the applica-
bility of reasoning with SDL in multi-agent systems.
2
Automated Reasoning for Standard Deontic Logic
Standard deontic logic (SDL) is obtained from the well-known modal logic K
by adding the seriality axiom D: □P →♦P. In this logic, the □-operator is
⋆This is a short version of [7]. It is supported by the DFG grants FU 263/15-1 and
STO 421/5-1 ’Ratiolog’.

2
interpreted as ‘it is obligatory that’ and the ♦as ‘it is permitted that’. The
♦-operator can be deﬁned by ♦P ≡¬□¬P. The seriality axiom in SDL states
that, if a formula has to hold in all reachable worlds, then there exists such a
world. With the deontic reading of □and ♦this means: Whenever the formula
P ought to be, then there exists a world where it holds. In consequence, there
is always a world, which is ideal in the sense that all the norms formulated by
‘the ought to be’-operator hold.
Deontic logic is the logic of choice when formalizing knowledge about norms
like the representation of legal knowledge or ethical codes for agents. However,
there are only few automated theorem provers specially dedicated for deontic
logic and used by deontic logicians (see [1,2]). Nonetheless, numerous approaches
to translate modal logics into (decidable fragments of) ﬁrst-order predicate logics
are stated in the literature. A nice overview including many relevant references
is given in [12].
In this paper, we use the ﬁrst order predicate logic theorem prover Hyper [14]
to handle SDL knowledge bases. By using the well-known translation of modal
logic into description logic [11] (called ϕ in the sequel) and the fact that Hyper
oﬀers a decision procedure for the description logic SHIQ [4], we are able to
process SDL eﬃciently. In the following, SDL is translated into ALC, which is a
subset of SHIQ.
Transformation from SDL into ALC
For a normative system consisting of the set of deontic logic formulae N =
{F1, . . . , Fn}, the translation ϕ is deﬁned as the conjunctive combination of the
translation of all deontic logic formulae in N:
ϕ(N) = ϕ(F1) ⊓. . . ⊓ϕ(Fn)
Note that ϕ(N) does not yet contain the translation of the seriality axiom.
As shown in [9], the seriality axiom can be translated into the TBox
T = {⊤⊑∃r.⊤}
with r the atomic role introduced by the mapping ϕ.
For our application, the result of the translation of a normative system N and
the seriality axiom is an ALC knowledge base Φ(N) = (T , A), where the TBox T
consists of the translation of the seriality axiom and the ABox A = {(ϕ(N))(a)}
for a new individual a. In description logics, performing a satisﬁability test of a
concept C w.r.t. a TBox is usually done by adding a new individual a together
with the ABox assertion C(a). For the sake of simplicity, we do this construction
already during the transformation of Φ by adding (ϕ(N))(a) to the ABox.
An advantage of the translation of deontic logic formulae into an ALC knowl-
edge base is the existence of a TBox in ALC. This makes it possible to add further
axioms to the TBox. For example we can add certain norms that we want to be
satisﬁed in all reachable worlds into the TBox.

3
Reasoning Tasks
With the help of Hyper, we can solve the following interesting reasoning tasks:
Consistency checking of normative systems: In practice, normative systems can
be very large. Therefore it is not easy to see, if a given normative system is
consistent. The Hyper theorem prover can be used to check consistency of a
normative system N.
Evaluation of normative systems: Given several normative systems, we use Hy-
per to ﬁnd out for which normative system a desired outcome is guaranteed.
3
An Example from Multi-agent Systems
In multi-agent systems, there is a challenging area of research, namely the for-
malization of ‘robot ethics’. It aims at deﬁning formal rules for the behavior of
agents and to prove certain properties. As an example consider Asimov’s laws,
which aim at regulating the relation between robots and humans. In [5], the
authors depict a small example of two surgery robots obeying ethical codes con-
cerning their work. These codes are expressed by means of MADL, which is an
extension of standard deontic logic with two operators. In [10], an axiomatization
of MADL is given. Further it is asserted, that MADL is not essentially diﬀerent
from standard deontic logic. This is why we use SDL to model the example.
Formalization in SDL
In our example, there are two robots ag1 and ag2 in a hospital. For the sake
of simplicity, each robot can perform one speciﬁc action: ag1 can terminate a
person’s life support and ag2 can delay the delivery of pain medication. In [5],
four diﬀerent ethical codes J, J ⋆, O and O⋆are considered:
– “If ethical code J holds, then robot ag1 ought to take care that life support
is terminated.” This is formalized as:
J →□act(ag1, term)
– “If ethical code J ⋆holds, then code J holds, and robot ag2 ought to take
care that the delivery of pain medication is delayed.” This is formalized as:
J ⋆→J ∧J ⋆→□act(ag2, delay)
– “If ethical code O holds, then robot ag2 ought to take care that delivery of
pain medication is not delayed.” This is formalized as:
O →□¬act(ag2, delay)

4
– “If ethical code O⋆holds, then code O holds, and robot ag1 ought to take
care that life support is not terminated.” This is formalized as:
O⋆→O ∧O⋆→□¬act(ag1, term)
Further we give a slightly modiﬁed version of the evaluation of the acts of the
robots, as stated in [5], where (+!!) denotes the most and (−!!) the least desired
outcome. Note that terms like (+!!) are just propositional atomic formulae here.
act(ag1, term) ∧
act(ag2, delay) →(−!!)
(1)
act(ag1, term) ∧¬act(ag2, delay) →(−!)
(2)
¬act(ag1, term) ∧
act(ag2, delay) →(−)
(3)
¬act(ag1, term) ∧¬act(ag2, delay) →(+!!)
(4)
These formulae evaluate the outcome of the robots’ actions. It makes sense
to assume, that this evaluation is eﬀective in all reachable worlds. This is why
we add formulae stating that formulae (1)–(4) hold in all reachable worlds. For
example, for (1) we add:
□(act(ag1, term) ∧act(ag2, delay) →(−!!))
(5)
Since our example does not include nested modal operators, the formulae of the
form (5) are suﬃcient to spread the evaluation formulae to all reachable worlds.
The normative system N formalizing this example consists of the formalization
of the four ethical codes and the formulae for the evaluation of the robots actions.
Reduction to a Satisﬁability Test
A possible query would be to ask if the most desirable outcome (+!!) will come
to pass if ethical code O⋆is operative. This query can be translated into a
satisﬁability test. If N ∧O⋆∧♦¬(+!!) is unsatisﬁable, then ethical code O⋆
ensures outcome (+!!).
Hyper can be used for this satisﬁability test. We obtain the desired result
namely that (only) ethical code O⋆leads to the most desirable behavior (+!!).
Experiment
We formalized this example and tested it with the Hyper theorem prover as
described above. Since all formalizations are available in ALC, we used the de-
scription logic reasoner Pellet [13] to compare the performance with Hyper. It
took Pellet 2.548 seconds and Hyper 2.596 seconds to show the unsatisﬁability.
Additional experiments can be found in [7]. For the examples we considered,
the runtimes of Pellet and Hyper are comparable. Further investigation and
comparison with other modal and/or description logic reasoning tools is required
and subject of future work.

5
4
Conclusion
In this paper, we illustrated with the help of an example how to use standard
deontic logic to model ethical codes for multi-agent systems. For normative sys-
tems described with deontic logic, there is a translation into description logic
concepts. These concepts can be checked automatically by automated theorem
provers. We used the Hyper theorem prover to prove that a speciﬁed desired
outcome is guaranteed, if a certain ethical code is operative.
