The Undesirable Dependence on Frequency of Gender Bias Metrics Based
on Word Embeddings
Francisco Valentini
ICC (UBA-CONICET)
Maestría en Data Mining (UBA)
Buenos Aires, Argentina

Germán Rosati
Escuela IDAES (UNSAM)
Buenos Aires, Argentina

Diego Fernandez Slezak
ICC (UBA-CONICET)
Buenos Aires, Argentina

Edgar Altszyler
ICC (UBA-CONICET)
Maestría en Data Mining (UBA)
Buenos Aires, Argentina

Abstract
Numerous works use word embedding-based
metrics to quantify societal biases and stereo-
types in texts.
Recent studies have found
that word embeddings can capture semantic
similarity but may be affected by word fre-
quency. In this work we study the effect of
frequency when measuring female vs. male
gender bias with word embedding-based bias
quantiﬁcation methods.
We ﬁnd that Skip-
gram with negative sampling and GloVe tend
to detect male bias in high frequency words,
while GloVe tends to return female bias in low
frequency words.
We show these behaviors
still exist when words are randomly shufﬂed.
This proves that the frequency-based effect ob-
served in unshufﬂed corpora stems from prop-
erties of the metric rather than from word as-
sociations.
The effect is spurious and prob-
lematic since bias metrics should depend ex-
clusively on word co-occurrences and not indi-
vidual word frequencies. Finally, we compare
these results with the ones obtained with an al-
ternative metric based on Pointwise Mutual In-
formation. We ﬁnd that this metric does not
show a clear dependence on frequency, even
though it is slightly skewed towards male bias
across all frequencies.
1
Introduction
Word embeddings are one of the most commonly
used techniques to measure semantic closeness be-
tween words in a corpus. In recent years, they
have been widely used in Computational Social
Science applications to measure societal biases and
stereotypes (Caliskan et al., 2017; Garg et al., 2018;
Kozlowski et al., 2019; Lewis and Lupyan, 2020;
Charlesworth et al., 2021).
For practical purposes, we consider bias to be
the degree to which the language used to describe
groups or things is different. Bias is typically mea-
sured by computing the difference between the
mean similarity of words of two context groups
A and B with respect to a target word x:
BiasWE = mean
a∈A cos(vx, va) −mean
b∈B cos(vx, vb),
(1)
where vi is the word embedding of word i and
cos(vi, vj) is the cosine similarity between vectors.
Gender bias has long been one of the most stud-
ied biases with this method. In this context, A and
B are usually deﬁned as gendered nouns and pro-
nouns (Caliskan et al., 2017; Lewis and Lupyan,
2020). A representative example is Garg et al.
(2018), where the female vs. male bias of pro-
fessions in historical corpora is found to correlate
with the percentage of women employed in each
profession over time.
Not as widely used as word embeddings, Point-
wise Mutual Information (PMI) is a metric of word
similarity that can also be used to study biases
(Gálvez et al., 2019; Aka et al., 2021; Valentini
et al., 2021). Valentini et al. (2021) deﬁne the PMI-
based bias metric as
BiasPMI = PMI(x, A) −PMI(x, B),
where
PMI(x, Y ) = log
P(x, Y )
P(x)P(Y ).
P(x, Y ) is the probability of co-occurrence be-
tween the word x with any one in Y in a window
of a predeﬁned number of words, and P(x) and
arXiv:2301.00792v1  [cs.CL]  2 Jan 2023

P(Y ) are the probability of occurrence of the word
x and any word in Y , respectively. Valentini et al.
(2021) show that BiasPMI can be expressed as
BiasPMI = log P(x|A)
P(x|B).
(2)
That is, BiasPMI can be interpreted as how much
more likely it is to ﬁnd words in x in the context of
words in A than in the context of words in B, in a
log scale. Thus, it captures exclusively ﬁrst-order
associations and can be computed via maximum
likelihood using co-occurrence counts from the text
(Valentini et al., 2021).
Some recent works have studied the relationship
between word frequencies and word embeddings.
In particular, embeddings seem to encode word fre-
quency even after normalization (Schnabel et al.,
2015), vector norm depends on word frequency
(Wilson and Schakel, 2015), top principal compo-
nent directions encode frequency in different ways
(Mu and Viswanath, 2018) and vectors of high-
frequency and low-frequency words lie in different
regions of the embedding space (Gong et al., 2018).
These studies are nevertheless inconclusive in
the sense that they do not determine clearly to what
extent the association observed is caused by actual
attributes of corpora or by undesirable properties of
embedding training. Hence, an answer to the origin
of the relation between embeddings and frequency
is yet to be found. What is more, the repercussions
of this effect in applications relevant to Computa-
tional Social Sciences such as bias quantiﬁcation
have not yet been explored.
We make three main contributions. First, we
show that frequency has an association with gen-
der bias when measured with word embedding-
based metrics: both Skip-gram with negative sam-
pling (SGNS) and GloVe-based bias metrics tend
to detect male bias in high frequency words, while
GloVe also yields female bias on average in low-
frequency words. Second, we show that the de-
pendence of the embedding-based gender bias on
frequency holds when tokens in the corpus are
randomly shufﬂed. This proves that the depen-
dence on frequency is an artifact of the metric it-
self i.e. that embedding-based bias metrics can
encode frequency spuriously. Third, we ﬁnd that
the PMI-based gender bias metric does not present
this frequency-based effect but is slightly skewed
towards male bias across all frequency ranges.1
1Code for the paper is available at https://github.com/
ftvalentini/EmbeddingsBiasFrequency
Our analyses are restricted to the English lan-
guage and are based on a binary understanding of
gender (see Limitations).
2
The effect of frequency on gender bias
Our objective is to study the association between
gender bias and frequency in the widely used
embedding-based metrics and in the alternative
PMI-based metric. Therefore, in a ﬁrst experiment,
we analyze this in two pretrained word embeddings,
GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014) and Word2Vec
with SGNS (Mikolov et al., 2013).
We do this by studying the distribution of bias
in different bins of frequency of words in the vo-
cabulary. Bias is computed with equation 1 with
the female and male context words lists used in
Caliskan et al. (2017), and we refer to this as fe-
male bias or gender bias. For each frequency bin,
we also compute the ratio between the mean and
the sample standard deviation (SD). These are Co-
hen’s d effect sizes of the mean of each group under
the null hypothesis of absence of bias on average
(Cohen, 1988). Here we use it as a normalized mag-
nitude of the deviation of the distribution from zero.
We use this methodology to assess the association
between gender bias and frequency hereinafter. See
Appendix B for further details.
There is a clear association between gender
BiasWE with the pretrained embeddings and tar-
get word frequency (Figure 1).
GloVe embed-
dings present a monotonic relationship between
frequency and gender bias, such that the top 103.5
words tend to have male bias with large effect sizes,
whereas less frequent words have mean female bias
with medium to large effect sizes. In the SGNS em-
beddings the effect is small and positive in less
frequent words, but in the top 100 words there is a
large shift towards male bias.
Even if there is literature which has studied the
relationship between frequency and word vectors
(see section 1), this result is still startling: a priori,
we wouldn’t expect the gender bias of words to
correlate so strongly with frequency, because word
similarity should be more closely related to seman-
tics and co-occurrences in the training corpus than
with the individual frequencies of words.
To validate this behavior, we train GloVe and
SGNS embeddings from scratch with the English
Wikipedia and study the association between gen-
der bias and word frequency. We compare this with
the results obtained with BiasPMI (equation 2).

Figure 1: Female bias distribution vs.
words’ fre-
quency rank in pretrained GloVe (top panel) and
Word2Vec with SGNS (bottom panel).
Words are
grouped into bins according to their rank in a log-scale,
so that the most frequent words are in the leftmost bin
and the less frequent, in the rightmost.
We use fre-
quency ranks as raw frequencies are not available for
pretrained embeddings. Blue dots represent the means
and blue values are the effect sizes (mean to SD ratio).
The plots are not comparable in either axis because the
corpus, the vocabulary and the training methodology of
each set of embeddings are different.
2.1
Comparing BiasWE with BiasPMI
Methods and data We measure the gender bias
of words in the vocabulary of the 2021 English
Wikipedia with BiasPMI and BiasWE and assess the
association with word frequency. We train SGNS
and GloVe vectors to compute BiasWE, whereas
the frequency counts from the corpus are used to
compute BiasPMI. Refer to appendices A and B for
details on the corpus and the methods, respectively.
Results The relation between BiasWE and fre-
quency in pretrained embeddings (Figure 1) holds
qualitatively when training embeddings from
scratch (top and middle panels in Figure 2). GloVe
embeddings yield a negative relationship between
female bias and frequency, while in SGNS we ﬁnd
an average male bias with medium to large effect
sizes in high frequency words.
When using BiasPMI no frequency bin is
strongly biased on average (bottom panel in Figure
2). There is however a slight skew towards male
bias, such that all frequency ranges present small
negative effect sizes. Furthermore, the variability
of bias tends to increase as the frequency of target
words decreases: this behavior is attributable to
the fact that PMI is usually high and noisy in low
frequency words (Jurafsky and Martin, 2009).
This analysis is not enough to determine that
the effect of frequency on embedding-based bias
metrics is a spurious artifact generated by the em-
beddings. It still might be the case that higher
frequency words are actually more male-biased
than lower frequency words due to second-order or
higher associations, thus yielding plots like those
on the top and middle panels of Figure 2. We con-
duct the following study to assess this.
2.2
The undesirable dependency on
frequency
Methods and data We create ﬁve randomly shuf-
ﬂed, independent versions of the Wikipedia corpus
where tokens are randomly located across the text.
In these corpora words keep their frequency but
lose their context because co-occurrences are com-
pletely random. We estimate bias with BiasWE and
BiasPMI in each of the corpora and consider the
average of the ﬁve values as the gender bias of each
word. We analyze the relationship between the gen-
der bias metrics and frequency in this setting. By
shufﬂing the words in the corpus, contexts become
meaningless, thus any association found between
bias and frequency in this setting is explained only
by the frequencies of the words. We highlight that
it is problematic and undesirable for a metric to
detect biases in a setting where they do not exist.
Results In this controlled experimental setup,
BiasWE presents a strong association with target
word frequency (Figure 3): average male bias
grows as frequency increases for both SGNS and
GloVe, with large effect sizes from around frequen-
cies 104 onwards. Low frequency words present
female bias on average when measured with GloVe,
while they tend to have a slight male bias with small
effect sizes when using SGNS.
Conversely, measuring bias with PMI in the shuf-
ﬂed corpora does not produce a clear dependence
on frequency. The average bias is roughly constant
for all frequencies, with small negative effect sizes;

Figure 2: Female bias vs.
frequency in Wikipedia.
Bias is measured with BiasWE using GloVe (top panel),
BiasWE using SGNS (middle panel), and BiasPMI (bot-
tom panel). Words in the vocabulary are grouped in
bins according to their frequencies in log-scale. Blue
dots represent the means and blue values are the effect
sizes (mean to SD ratio).
that is, there is a slight skew towards male bias
across all frequencies.
3
Discussion and Conclusion
In this work we revealed the existence of a spurious
frequency-based distortion in gender bias metrics
based on the cosine similarity between word em-
beddings. Both SGNS and GloVe-based gender
bias metrics tend to detect male bias in high fre-
quency words, while GloVe also yields female bias
on average in low frequency words.
To determine whether this effect is indeed an
undesirable artifact of the embedding-based metric
we assessed the relation between gender bias and
frequency in shufﬂed corpora, where words lose
Figure 3:
Female bias vs.
frequency in shufﬂed
Wikipedia. The bias of each word is computed as the
average of ﬁve estimates, one for each of ﬁve shufﬂes
performed. Words are grouped in bins according to
their frequencies. Blue dots represent the means and
blue values are the effect sizes (mean to SD ratio).
their context but keep their frequency. Results re-
veal that the dependence on frequency is caused by
the metric and does not originate from actual prop-
erties of the texts. This shows that popular gender
bias measurements can detect bias even when there
is none. Additionally, we found that an alternative
PMI-based bias metric does not show a clear depen-
dence on frequency, even though it shows a slight
tendency towards male bias.
According to these results, we consider the
PMI-based bias metric has an advantage over the
embedding-based metrics, which adds to the ad-
vantages of interpretability and hypothesis testing
(Valentini et al., 2021). However, as PMI captures
exclusively ﬁrst-order associations and is unable to
capture synonyms, it may be required to include
several terms associated to the context words in

order to measure some biases.
Male nouns and pronouns are usually more fre-
quent than female ones in large corpora (Twenge
et al., 2012; Gálvez et al., 2019). For example,
in the Wikipedia corpus, he appears 11.8 million
times, while the frequency of she is 3.5 million (re-
fer to Appendix B for the frequencies of the other
gendered context words).
The disparity in frequencies of male and female
contexts is a type of bias in itself and can be mea-
sured by counting word occurrences. In contrast,
the bias we study refers to the stereotyped contexts
in which male and female entities are portrayed,
and should be independent of individual word fre-
quencies.
When words are shufﬂed, the biases associated
with the contexts of female and male context words
are eliminated, but the disparities in frequencies are
maintained. We propose that bias metrics capture
this disparity in frequencies of female and male
context words. In the case of the embedding-based
metric, this hypothesis is supported by the existing
evidence that embeddings encode word frequency
in addition to semantics.
We believe the random-shufﬂing experiment is
general enough to show that the frequency effect
would still exist with other word lists, types of bi-
ases and domains, as long as the frequencies of
the context words differ. This result is important
because the context words’ frequencies are disre-
garded when measuring biases with embeddings.
Our ﬁndings have important implications for
bias measurement applications, as they cast doubt
on the reliability of widely used bias metrics when
the frequencies of the words involved are very dif-
ferent. We believe that more effort should be put
into designing new bias detection methods that do
not suffer from this weakness.
Limitations
We use sets of context words typically used in
the gender bias literature. These words imply a
binary understanding of gender, excluding other
gender representations from the bias measurement.
Moreover, we focus exclusively on the English
Wikipedia corpus and do not apply methods on cor-
pora of other domains, which might yield different
distributions of gender bias.
We report results using default hyperparame-
ters. This intends to mimic the typical experimental
setup found in the Computational Social Science
literature. Hyperparameters are left at their default
values because there is no ground truth for biases,
i.e. there are no annotations indicating the level of
bias of words.
The studies conducted in this work can be
adapted to other languages, other biases and other
corpora. We hope further research can assess the
frequency-based distortion in these settings as well
as the inﬂuence of hyperparameter choices.
