(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 9, No. 1, January 2011 
A Multi-Purpose Scenario-based Simulator 
 for Smart House Environments 
 
Zahra Forootan Jahromi and Amir Rajabzadeh* 
Department of Computer Engineering  
Razi University 
Kermanshah, Iran 

Ali Reza Manashty 
Department of IT and Computer Engineering  
Shahrood University of Technology 
Shahrood, Iran 

 
 
Abstract: Developing smart house systems has been a great 
challenge for researchers and engineers in this area because of 
the high cost of implementation and evaluation process of these 
systems, while being very time consuming. Testing a designed 
smart house before actually building it is considered as an 
obstacle towards an efficient smart house project. This is 
because of the variety of sensors, home appliances and devices 
available for a real smart environment. In this paper, we 
present the design and implementation of a multi-purpose 
smart house simulation system for designing and simulating all 
aspects of a smart house environment. This simulator provides 
the ability to design the house plan and different virtual 
sensors and appliances in a two dimensional model of the 
virtual house environment. This simulator can connect to any 
external smart house remote controlling system, providing 
evaluation capabilities to their system much easier than before. 
It also supports detailed adding of new emerging sensors and 
devices to help maintain its compatibility with future 
simulation needs. Scenarios can also be defined for testing 
various possible combinations of device states; so different 
criteria and variables can be simply evaluated without the need 
of experimenting on a real environment. 
Keywords- smart house simulator; scenario-based smart house; 
virtual smart house; sensor simulator. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
As new technologies are emerging, people are more 
eager to apply these technologies to their house in order to be 
more and more comfortable and secure. Smart houses, as a 
state-of-the-art technology in two last decades, are becoming 
the most exciting and useful tools in our daily lives, which 
has brought a higher comfort and security level into our life. 
The terms smart homes and intelligent homes have been 
used for more than a decade to introduce the concept of 
smart devices and equipment in the house. According to the 
Smart Homes Association the best definition of the smart 
home technologies is “The integration of technology and 
services through home networking for a better quality of 
living”. 
Smart home is not only an interesting topic, but also a 
burgeoning industry as well as entering to a broad audience 
home gradually [1]. Most programmers have to design smart 
home systems case by case and spend a lot of time managing 
them [2]. Many others have already presented how to cut 
down the building costs by using smart home simulators or 
high level programming languages [3]. 
Smart houses could be divided into two main categories: 
• 
Programmable houses – are those scenario-based 
systems programmed to perform an action triggered 
by a condition on a sensor output. 
• 
Intelligent houses – are those that possess some kind 
of intelligence without the need of precise manual 
design of the procedures. 
A. Programmable Houses 
Programmable houses will be those that have reactions 
based only on simple sensor inputs, and possess no built-in 
intelligence. Such a house for a predefined input has a 
programmed set of actions to perform. 
Examples of such actions might be light bulbs operated 
by movement sensors, or selection of one of the predefined 
lighting settings by a button on a remote controller. 
Actually, many of currently manufactured and sold smart 
house systems belong to this group.  
The biggest problem with this type of houses is that they 
have to be reprogrammed when some of the features change. 
That presents a problem for many people and requires calling 
a technician to get the job done.  
Hence increasing tension to develop some smart home 
solution that is based on artificial intelligence will adapt its 
operation to changing user behavior. That tension leads to 
development of the houses that belong to the second 
category. This paper, though, supports the first group of 
smart houses described earlier. 
B. Inteligent Houses 
They represent the state-of-the-art technology. Those 
types of installations are driven by artificial intelligence, and 
instead of having to be programmed they are able to learn 
basing on observation of inhabitants behavior over a period 
of time. 
*Corresponding Author
13
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 9, No. 1, January 2011 
One of the first successful implementations was well 
known Adaptive House developed by M. Mozer at 
University of Colorado back in 1998. Some other examples 
that belong to the group of intelligent houses are: 
• Georgia Tech Aware Home 
• AIRE spaces at MIT 
• Interactive Workspaces Project at Stanford 
• Gaia project at UIUC 
• MavHome project at UTA 
The smart house consists of a large and wide ranging set 
of many services, applications, equipment, networks and 
systems that act together in delivering the “intelligent” or 
“connected” home in order to maintain security and control, 
communications, 
leisure 
and 
comfort, 
environmental 
integration and accessibility. These components are 
represented by many actors that interact and work together to 
provide interactive systems that benefit the home based user 
in the smart house. Because of this wide ranging variability 
of the entities in the smart house, there is a very high level of 
potential complexity in finding the optimal solution for each 
different smart house.  
 For researchers and engineers, it is difficult to work in 
the real smart home since home appliances are very 
expensive. 
In 
this 
paper 
we 
present 
the 
designing 
and 
implementation of a comprehensive smart house simulator 
to reduce these complexities of implementation a smart 
house and also find the best solution of making a home or a 
building smart. Our simulator is completely object based, 
because we have considered no limitation in different 
process of simulation. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
There have been lots of works on this research area 
including the big corporations and research groups. As a 
result, various ubiquitous computing simulators such as the 
Ubiquitous Wireless Infrastructure Simulation Environment 
(Ubiwise) and TATUS and Context Aware Simulation 
Toolkit (CAST) have been proposed. The Ubiwise 
Simulator is used to test computation and communication 
devices. It has three dimensional (3D) models that form a 
physical environment viewed by users on a desktop 
computer through two windows [4, 5]. This simulator 
focuses on device testing, e.g., in aggregating device 
functions and exploring the integration of handheld devices 
and Internet service. Thus, this simulator does not consider 
an adaptive environment. TATUS is built using the Half 
Life game engine. Therefore, it looks like an assembled 
simulation game. It constructs a 3D virtual environment, 
e.g., a meeting scenario. Using this simulator, a user 
commands a virtual character to perform tasks, such as to sit 
down. This simulator does not consider device simulation 
[6]. CAST is a simulator for the test home domain. This 
simulator uses scenario based approach. It has been 
proposed as a prototype using Macromedia’s Flash MX 
2004 [7]. However, using Flash MX [8] does not support 
users to freely control their environment. Joon Seok Park et 
al. proposed the design structure for smart home simulator 
regardless of environment factor as well as interaction 
aspect [9]. 
III. 
 PROPOSED SMART HOUSE SIMULATOR 
There are many simulators in different scope of science 
and the main purpose of implementing and developing them 
is demonstrating a virtual model of real subject as well, in 
order to decrease the problems and difficulties emerge in the 
way of implementing and evaluating the proposed project in 
reality. 
Indeed researchers use simulators to decrease costs and 
consumed time for testing and evaluating their ideas on 
developing and evaluating a project. So the principle duty of 
a simulator is simulating a virtual model of reality that must 
be close to its actual model in the real world 
In 
this 
paper, 
we 
present 
the 
designing 
and 
implementation of smart house simulator for developing and 
evaluating smart house projects to decrease the obstacles in 
the way of such projects, mostly cost and time. Due to some 
difficulties such as providing the necessary real sensors and 
home appliances to analyze the real home environment, 
couldn’t advance any further than their design level. 
This simulator can be used as a substitution for the 
corresponding real smart environment. Every kind of state-
of-the-art sensors and home appliances can be used in the 
proposed simulator. All the necessary requirements for 
making a house smart are provided in the simulator. 
In the following sections we explain the designing and 
implementation level of the project and then discuss about 
the main features of the proposed simulator. 
All the principle futures and main capabilities are 
considered in the designing level, which distinct the 
proposed simulator from other similar systems. 
Some of the most important characteristics of the 
simulator are describing in the following sections. These 
principle features of the proposed system are illustrated in 
Fig.1.  
 
Figure 1: Principle features of the proposed Smart House Simulator 
A. Top view plan of the specified house 
The 
simulator 
should 
have 
the 
capability 
of 
demonstrating the plane of the desired house plan in order to 
be able to simulate a more real virtual model of the house 
(Fig. 2). The possibility of drawing the house plane is 
provided in this simulator, so the user can define all  
14
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 9, No. 1, January 2011 
 
Figure 2: Simulator environment containing top view plan of the house and virtual simulated devices 
 
boundaries of the house such as different rooms, doors, 
windows and etc. The user also can load an image of top 
view plan of a house as the house plan. 
After designing the house plan user should place each 
home appliance in their positions as they placed is in real 
house so user can distinguish them easily for crating different 
tasks in different objects. User can design the most real 
model of the real house by using this capability of the 
proposed simulator. 
B. Supporting all kinds of sensors and home appliances 
Using different types of sensors and actuators for getting 
and setting status of each device is an inseparable part of 
every smart house projects. Many of these sensors are too 
expensive and some of them have various kinds with 
different futures of a certain type. 
As technology is improving so fast, it’s obvious that 
every day a new kind of sensors, actuators and home 
appliances will emerge, so the ability of supporting any kind 
of sensors and actuators is an important future for a smart 
house simulator. 
This simulator provides the possibility of creating a 
virtual model of any kind of cutting-edge sensors and devices 
with defining all of their details like the kind of data that 
each sensor can sense (Fig. 3).  
As it is shown in this figure, first user should enter a 
name for the considered sensor and then select the data 
format of it. Data format is the format of the considered 
sensor that each sensor uses it for demonstrating the status of 
environment. We have considered 3 data format for sensors 
contains “Numeral”, “Point” and “Multi States”, because 
almost all the sensors data format can be in one of these 
kinds of data. For example light sensor data format is multi 
state and it means this sensor use for example two state of 
“On” and “Off” for showing the light status of environments. 
The data format of each sensor can be defined via this 
form, so that every kind of sensors will all details can be 
simulated and have a very close model of each sensor in 
order to have an optimal simulation of smart houses. 
For example a light sensor demonstrate the level of light 
by describing it in 3 level of light, dim and dark; but a 
temperature sensor show the temperature of an environment 
in range of numbers or a temperature sensor demonstrates the 
temperature status of the environments in a range of number, 
so user should choose the numeral data format for this kind 
of sensor. 
So there is no limitation for using any kind of off the 
shelf equipment for simulating a virtual smart house 
environment as well and user can add any number and kind 
of sensors and home appliances in the simulator. Fig. 4 
illustrates the Windows Form which handles adding any 
virtual model of devices to the simulator. Then user should 
assign related sensors to each device and choose the devices 
icon to be shown in designed house environment.   
15
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 9, No. 1, January 2011 
 
Figure 3: Add sensor form. This form enables the user to create any kind of 
sensors for use in the devices. 
 
 
Figure 4: Adding house devices form 
C. Connecting to house remote controlling systems 
There are a number of houses remote controlling projects 
which controlling the devices of a smart house remotely via 
web or mobile messaging systems. 
The proposed simulator can connect to the server of these 
systems through a network or web. Users can observe the 
designing simulated house by using internet or via a network 
and define a task to be done and then send it as a command 
to the house remote controlling server. The simulator is 
always checking the server and applies the commands on 
proper devices.  
After each tasks done, the simulator send the updated 
status of each device to the server. The format of updated 
status for sending to the server should be in a certain format 
as Fig. 5 illustrates. This feature enables the use of this 
simulator as a good substitution for smart houses testing 
facilities. 
 
Figure 5: The fields in the packet used to send data to smart house remote 
controlling server 
D. Planning scenarios 
 Scenarios make it easy for people saving the list of 
actions for further use, in addition to design multiple actions 
to be done in a single scenario. Later the scenarios can be 
enabled / disabled in the scenarios list or be used in another 
scenario too. Cheng, Wang and Chen proposed a reasoning 
system for smart houses that is also scenario based [10]. 
One of the capabilities of this simulator, which distinct it 
from other smart house simulators is the ability of creating 
scenarios. Each scenario consists of some scheduled tasks 
and each scheduled task defines a particular action for 
executing on a special device. As it is shown in figure 5, 
each scenario has a name and first executing time and date. It 
means for the first time that a scenario will be executed, user 
should define the date and time of executing it. A repeating 
time is considered to repeat the scenario automatically after 
the first time it executed, and there is no need that user each 
time Enable the scenario. 
So by using a scenario, a set of tasks will execute 
continuously. As it is shown in the Fig. 6, a delay time is 
considered for each task which was selected to be added in a 
scenario. This means as soon as a scenario executes, a set of 
selected tasks will be run after its defined time passed from 
the previous executed task.    
User can define each schedule and set a combination of 
specified schedules as a scenario. Scenarios are used for 
testing various possible combinations of device states; so 
different criteria and variables can be simply evaluated, 
without the need of experimenting on a real environment. 
The scenarios are designed to set a number of tasks all in 
one place for further and easier use [11]. 
IV. 
EVALUATION 
To evaluate the proposed Smart House Simulator we 
considered a set of scheduled tasks which created by user 
via the proposed software and then execute them on defined 
device at the defined time.  
In order to create a test plan for simulating via proposed 
simulator, first user should design a house plane and defines 
different home appliances and sensors and assign related 
sensors to each appliance. Then via the “define scheduled 
task” some tasks should be created on desired objects which 
are used in the house.  
Each task executes on a special device at a specific time 
and date and set the device’s sensor to defined data. Also a 
scenario can be created via proposed smart house simulator 
as it described in planning scenarios section. 
Scenarios are a set of these tasks which user has create them 
via “scheduled a task” form without considering their Time 
and date. 
16
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 9, No. 1, January 2011 
 
           Figure 6: Define Scenario form. A set of scheduled task in the “Scheduled Tasks” checked box, should be selected for defining the scenario. 
These scheduled are created by user via “Define Schedule” form. 
 
 
To check the updated status of devices trough the 
simulator, a solution considered that can show status of each 
device every time the user get the status of them. As it is 
demonstrated in Fig. 7, by clicking on a specific device and 
choose “Get Status” option, the updated status of the 
selective device shown in a message box. So it can be 
realized if each task has executed correctly or not. Testing a 
defined scenario is the same also. We only should get the 
status of all devices which are defined in the scenario as 
scheduled tasks. 
 
Figure 7: checking the status of selected device 
 
V. 
CONCOLUSIONS 
In   this paper we presented design and implementation of 
smart house simulator, which has considered all aspect of 
smart environment and there is no limitation for using 
virtual state-of-the-art sensors and appliances for simulation.  
 
The proposed simulator have some characteristics 
which distinct it from other smart house simulators. The 
ability of designing the plan of desired house plan or load 
top view plan of the house as it’s plan and then placed 
appliances in their real place, makes this simulator to 
simulate a house very close to the real mod. 
Scenarios make it easy for people saving the list of 
actions for further use, in addition to design multiple 
actions to be done in a single scenario.  
The ability of connecting to smart house remote 
controlling systems is a good choice for researchers in 
this area to evaluate their projects. Because this feature of 
propose smart house simulator need a special format for 
interpreting commands, we considered a unique format 
for commands which received from house remote 
controlling systems. 
 
 
VI. 
FUTURE WORKS 
In the future works, we plan to add the ability to define 
some variables such as energy consumption, computational 
complexity and etc. so that we can observe the changes in 
these variables as the simulation continues. This can be a 
great leap forward in minimization plans that are about to be 
applied on real smart houses but the real outcome of plan is 
hard to estimate as a linear or even nonlinear equation. The 
simulator can run the house scenarios and calculate real-
time values of the variables so we can have a better estimate 
of the minimization plan if applied to a similar real house. 
17
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 9, No. 1, January 2011
