A Survey on Advancing the DBMS Query Optimizer: Cardinality
Estimation, Cost Model, and Plan Enumeration
Hai Lan
RMIT University
Melbourne, Australia

Zhifeng Bao
RMIT University
Melbourne, Australia

Yuwei Peng*
Wuhan University
Wuhan, China

ABSTRACT
Query optimizer is at the heart of the database systems. Cost-based
optimizer studied in this paper is adopted in almost all current
database systems. A cost-based optimizer introduces a plan enu-
meration algorithm to find a (sub)plan, and then uses a cost model
to obtain the cost of that plan, and selects the plan with the lowest
cost. In the cost model, cardinality, the number of tuples through
an operator, plays a crucial role. Due to the inaccuracy in cardi-
nality estimation, errors in cost model, and the huge plan space,
the optimizer cannot find the optimal execution plan for a complex
query in a reasonable time. In this paper, we first deeply study the
causes behind the limitations above. Next, we review the techniques
used to improve the quality of the three key components in the
cost-based optimizer, cardinality estimation, cost model, and plan
enumeration. We also provide our insights on the future directions
for each of the above aspects.
KEYWORDS
Query Optimizer; Cardinality Estimation; Cost Model; Plan Enu-
meration
1
INTRODUCTION
Query optimizer is at the heart of relational database manage-
ment systems (RDBMSes) and some big data process engines, e.g.
SCOPE [7]. Given a query written in a declarative language (e.g.,
SQL), the optimizer finds the most efficient execution plan (also
called physical plan) and feeds it to the executor. Thus, most of the
time, the users only think over how to transform their requirements
to a valid query without the need to analyze how to run the query
efficiently. Almost all systems adopt a cost-based optimizer based
on the architecture of System R [79] or Volcano/Cascades [27, 28].
Figure 1 illustrates the three most important components in a
cost-based optimizer: cardinality estimation (CE), cost model
(CM), and plan enumeration (PE). CE uses statistics of data and
some assumptions about data distribution, column correlation, and
join relationship to get the number of tuples generated by an inter-
mediate operator1, which is also crucial for other search problems,
e.g., [101, 102]. CM can be regarded as a complex function that
maps the current state of database and estimated cardinalities to
the cost of executing a (sub)plan. PE is an algorithm to explore the
space of semantically equivalent join orders and find the optimal or-
ders with minimal cost. There are two principal approaches to find
an optimal join order: bottom-up join enumeration via dynamic pro-
gramming and top-down join enumeration through memorization.
1In some context, the cardinality in the database area refers to distinct count [35].
Figure 1: Query optimizer architecture. IS, HJ, NL, and TS
refer to index scan, hash join, nestloop join, and table scan.
Theoretically, provided that the estimated cardinality and cost
are accurate, and plan enumeration component can efficiently walk
through the huge search space, this architecture can obtain the
optimal execution plan in a reasonable time. However, it fails in
reality. Despite decades of work, cost-based query optimizers still
make mistakes on “difficult” queries due to the error in CE, the
difficulty in building an accurate CM, and the pain in finding the
optimal join orders (PE) for complex queries. The details are pre-
sented in Section 2, i.e., why the existing optimizer is still far from
satisfaction.
There are lots of research studies proposed to improve the capa-
bility of the optimizer. In this paper, we present a survey on them.
Specifically, we review the publications which are proposed to im-
prove the capabilities of the three key components in the optimizer,
i.e., CE, CM, PE.
This paper makes the following contributions:
(1) We summarize the reasons why the CE, CM, and PE do not
perform well (Section 2).
(2) We review the studies proposed to estimate cardinality more
accurately. According to the techniques used, we categorize
them into synopsis-based methods, sampling-based methods,
and learning-based methods (Section 3).
(3) We review the work on improving the cost model. We classify
them into three groups: improvement of the existing cost
model, cost model alternatives, and performance prediction
for a single query (Section 4).
(4) We review the techniques used in plan enumeration and
study the non-learning methods used to handle large queries.
Besides, we review recent proposed methods, which adopt
reinforcement learning to select the join order (Section 5).
(5) In Sections 3-5, we present our insights on the future direc-
tions respectively.
There are two related surveys. In 1998, Chaudhuri [8] reviews
the work with non-learning methods on query optimizer. In the last
two decades, many methods are proposed to improve the capability
of the optimizer. It is necessary to review the new work. Recently,
arXiv:2101.01507v1  [cs.DB]  5 Jan 2021

Hai Lan, Zhifeng Bao, and Yuwei Peng*
Zhou et al. [107] investigate how AI is introduced in the different
parts of DBMS, such as monitoring, tuning, optimizer. In this paper,
we focus on the query optimizer and give a comprehensive survey
on the three key components of the optimizer. We summarize the
learning-based and non-learning methods at the same time, review
these work in details, and present possible future directions for
each of them.
2
WHY KEY COMPONENTS IN OPTIMIZER
ARE STILL NOT ACCURATE?
In this section, we summarize the reasons why the cardinality
estimation, cost model, and plan enumeration do not perform well
respectively. The studies reviewed in this paper try to improve the
quality of the optimizer by handling these shortages.
2.1
Cardinality Estimation
Cardinality estimation is the ability to estimate the tuples generated
by an operator and is used in the cost model to calculate the cost
of that operator. Lohman [62] points out that the cost model can
introduce errors of at most 30%, while the cardinality estimation
can easily introduce errors of many orders of magnitude. Leis et al.
[56] experimentally revisit the components, CE, CM, and PE in
the classical optimizers with complex workloads. They focus on
the quality of the physical plan on multi-join queries and get the
same conclusion with Lohman.
The errors in cardinality estimation are mainly introduced in
three cases:
(1) Error in single table with predications. Database sys-
tems usually take histograms as the approximate distribution
of data. Histograms are smaller than the original data. Thus,
it cannot represent the true distribution entirely and some
assumptions (e.g. uniformity on a single attribute, indepen-
dence assumption among different attributes) are proposed.
When those assumptions are not hold, estimation errors oc-
cur, leading to sub-optimal plans. The correlation among
attributes in a table is not unusual. Multi-histograms have
been proposed. However, it suffers from a large storage size.
(2) Error in multi-join queries. Correlations possibly exist in
columns from different tables. However, there is no efficient
way to get synopses between two or more tables. Inclusion
principle has been introduced for this case. The cardinality
of a join operator is calculated using the inclusion principle
with cardinalities of its children. It has large errors when the
assumption is not held. Besides, for a complex query with
multiple tables, the estimation errors can propagate and
amplify from the leaves to root of the plan. The optimizers of
commercial and open-source database systems still struggle
in cardinality estimation for mult-join queries [56].
(3) Error in user defined function. Most of database systems
support the user-defined function (UDF). When a UDF exists
in the condition, there is no general method to estimate how
many tuples satisfying it [8].
2.2
Cost Model
Cost-based optimizers use a cost model to generate the estimate of
cost for a (sub)query. The cost of (sub)plan is the sum of costs of all
operators in it.
The cost of an operator depends on the hardware where the
database is deployed, the operator’s implementation, the number of
tuples processed by the operator, and the current database state (e.g.,
data in the buffer, concurrent queries) [65]. Thus, a large number of
magic numbers should be determined when combining all factors,
and errors in cardinality estimation also affect the quality of the cost
model. Furthermore, when the cost-based optimizer is deployed
in a distributed or parallel database, the cloud environment, or
the cross-platform query engines, the complexity of cost model is
increasing dramatically. Moreover, even with the true cardinality,
the cost estimation of a query is not linear to the running time,
which may lead to a suboptimal execution plan [46, 81].
2.3
Plan Enumeration
Plan enumeration algorithm is used to find the optimal join order
from the space of semantically equivalent join orders such that the
query cost is minimized. It has been proven to be an NP-hard prob-
lem [42]. Exhaustive query plan enumeration is a prohibitive task
for large databases with multi-join queries. Thus, it is crucial to ex-
plore the right search space which should consist of the optimal join
orders or approximately optimal join orders and design an efficient
enumeration algorithm. The join trees in the search space could
be zig-zag trees, left-deep trees, right-deep trees, and bushy trees
or the subset of them. Different systems consider different forms
of join tree. There are three enumeration algorithms in traditional
database systems: (1) bottom up join enumeration via dynamic
programming (DP) (e.g., System R [79]), (2) top-down join enumera-
tion through memorization (e.g., Volcano/Cascades [27, 28]), and (3)
randomized algorithms (e.g., genetic algorithm in PostgreSQL [12]
with numerous tables joining).
Plan enumeration suffers from three limitations: (1) the errors in
cardinality estimation and cost model, (2) the rules used to prune
the search space, and (3) dealing with the queries with large number
of tables. When a query touches a large number of tables, optimizers
have to sacrifice optimality and employ heuristics to keep optimiza-
tion time reasonable, like genetic algorithm in PostgreSQL, greedy
method in DB2, which usually generates poor plans.
We should notice the errors in cardinality will propagate to
the cost model and lead to suboptimal join order. Eliminating or
reducing the errors in cardinality is the first step to build a capable
optimizer as Lohman [62] says “The root of all evil, the Achilles Heel
of query optimization, is the estimation of the size of intermediate
results, known as cardinalities”.
In the following three sections, we summarize the research ef-
forts made to handle limitations in CE, CM, and PE, i.e, how to
make the query optimizer good.
3
CARDINALITY ESTIMATION
At present, there are three major strategies for cardinality estima-
tion as shown in Figure 2. We only list some representative work for
each category. Every method tries to approximate the distribution

A Survey on Advancing the DBMS Query Optimizer: Cardinality Estimation, Cost Model, and Plan Enumeration
Figure 2: A classification of cardinality estimation methods
of data well with less storage. Some proposed methods combine
different techniques, e.g., [91, 92].
3.1
Synopsis-based methods
Synopsis-based methods introduce new data structures to record the
statistics information. Histogram and sketch are the widely adopted
forms. A survey on synopses has been proposed in 2012 [10], which
focuses on distinguishing aspects of synopses that are pertinent to
Approximate Query Processing (AQP).
3.1.1
Histogram. There are two histogram types: 1-dimensional
and d-dimensional histograms, where 𝑑≥2. d-dimensional his-
tograms can capture the correlation between different attributes.
A 1-dimensional histogram on attribute a is constructed by par-
titioning the sorted tuples into 𝐵(≥1) mutually disjoint subsets,
called buckets and approximates the frequencies and values in each
bucket in some common fashion, e.g., uniform distribution and con-
tinuous values. A d-dimensional histogram on an attribute group
A is constructed by partitioning the joint data distribution of A.
Because there is no order between different attributes, the partition
rule needs to be more intricate. In 2003, Ioannidis [44] present a
comprehensive survey on histograms following the classification
method in [77]. Gunopulos et al. [30] also propose a survey in
2003, which focuses on the work used to estimate the selectivity
over multiple attributes. They summarize the multi-dimensional
histograms and kernel density estimators. After 2003, the work in
histograms can be divided into three categories: (1) fast algorithm
for histogram construction [1, 29, 33, 34, 43]; (2) new partition
methods to divide the data into different buckets to achieve better
accuracy [15, 59, 88]; (3) histogram construction based on query
feedback [48, 58, 83]. Query feedback methods are also summarized
in [10] (Section 3.5.1.2) and readers can refer to it for details.
Guha et al. [29] analyze the previous algorithm, VODP [45] and,
find some calculations on the minimal sum-of-squared-errors (SSE)
can be reduced. They design an efficient algorithm AHistL-Δ with
time complexity 𝑂(𝑛+ 𝐵3(lg𝑛+ 𝜖−2)) while VODP takes 𝑂(𝑛2𝐵),
where 𝑛is the domain size, 𝐵is the number of buckets, and 𝜖is a
precision parameter. Halim et al. [33, 34] propose GDY, a fast his-
togram construction algorithm based on greedy local search. GDY
generates good sample boundaries, which then are used to con-
struct 𝐵final partitions optimally using VODP. This study compares
GDY variants with AHistL-Δ [29] in minimizing the total errors of
all the buckets and shows its superiority in resolving the efficiency-
quality trade-off. Instead of scanning the whole dataset [29], In-
dyk et al. [43] design a greedy algorithm to construct the his-
togram on the random samples from dataset with time complexity
𝑂((𝐵5/𝜖8) log2 𝑛) and sample complexity𝑂((𝐵/𝜖)2 log𝑛). Acharya
et al. [1] study the same problem with [43] and propose a merging
algorithm with time complexity 𝑂(1/𝜖2). Methods in [1, 29, 43] can
be extended to approximate distributions by piecewise polynomials.
Considering the tree-based indexes divide the data into differ-
ent segments (nodes), which is quite similar with buckets in the
histogram, Eavis and Lopez [15] build the multi-dimensional his-
togram based on R-tree. They first build a native R-tree histogram
on the Hilbert sort of data, and then, propose a sliding window algo-
rithm to enhance the naive histogram under a new proposed metric,
which seeks to minimize the dead space between bucket points. Lin
et al. [59] design a two-level histogram for one attribute, which is
quite similar to the idea of the B-tree index. The first level is used
to locate which leaf histograms to be used, and the leaf histograms
store the statistics information. To et al. [88] construct a histogram
based on the principle of minimizing the entropy reduction of the
histogram. They design two different histograms for the equality
queries and an incremental algorithm to construct the histogram.
However, it only considers the one-dimensional histogram and does
not handle range queries well.
3.1.2
Sketch. Sketch models a column as a vector or matrix to
calculate the distinct count (e.g., HyperLogLog [22]) or frequency
of tuples (e.g., Count Min [11]) on a value. Rusu and Dobra [78]
summarize how to use different sketches to estimate the join size.
This work considers the case of two tables (or data streams) without
filters. The basic idea of them is: (1) building the sketch (a vector or
matrix) on the join attribute, while ignoring all the other attributes,
(2) estimating the join size based on the multiplication of the vectors
or matrices. These methods only support the equi-join and join on
single column. As shown in [94], a possible method introducing one
filter in sketch is to build an imaginary table which only consists
of the join value of tuples which satisfy the filter. However, this
makes the estimation drastically worse. Skimmed sketch [24] is
based on the idea of bifocal sampling [25] to estimate the join size.
However, it requires knowing frequencies of the most frequent join
attribute values. Recent work [6] on join size estimation introduces
the sketch to record the degree of a value.
3.1.3
Other Techniques. TuG [82] is a graph-based synopsis. The
node of TuG represents a set of tuples from the same table or a
set of values for the same attribute. The edge represents the join
relationship between different tables or between attributes and
values. The authors adopt a three-step algorithm to construct TuG
and introduce the histogram to summarize the value distribution
in a node. When a new query comes, the selectivity is estimated by
traversing TuG. The construction process is quite time-consuming

Hai Lan, Zhifeng Bao, and Yuwei Peng*
and cannot be used in a large dataset. Without the relationship
between different tables, TuG cannot be built.
3.2
Sampling-based Methods
Synopsis-based methods are quite difficult to capture the correla-
tion between different tables. Some researchers try to use a specific
sampling strategy to collect a set of samples (tuples) from tables,
and then run the (sub)query over samples to estimate the cardinality.
As long as the distribution of the obtained samples is close to the
original data, the cardinality estimation is believable. Thus, lots of
work have been proposed to design a good sampling approach, from
independent sampling to correlated sampling technique. Sampling-
based methods also are summarized in [10]. After 2011, there are
numerous studies that utilize the sampling techniques. Different
with [10], we mainly summarize the new work. Moreover, we re-
view the work according to their publishing time and present the
relationship between them, i.e., which shortages of the previous
work the later work tries to overcome.
In 1993, Haas et al. [31] analyze the six different fixed-step (a
pre-defined sample size) sampling methods for the equi-join queries.
They conclude that if there are some indexes built on join keys,
page-level sampling combining the index is the best way. Otherwise,
the page-level cross-product sampling is the most efficient way.
Then, the authors extend the fixed-step methods to fixed-precision
procedures.
Ganguly et al. [25] introduce bifocal sampling to estimate the
size of an equi-join. They classify values of the join attribute in
each relation into two groups, sparse (s) and dense (d) based on
their frequencies. Thus, the join type between tuples can be s-s,
s-d, d-s, and d-d. The authors first adopt t_cross sampling [31] to
estimate the join size of d-d , then adopt t_index to estimate the join
size of the remaining cases, and finally add all the estimation as the
join size estimation. However, it needs an extra pass to determine
the frequencies of different values and needs indexes to estimate
the join size for s-s, s-d, and d-s. Without indexes, the process is
time-consuming.
End-biased sampling [16] stores the (𝑣, 𝑓𝑣) if 𝑓𝑣≥𝑇, where 𝑣
is a value in the join attribute domain, 𝑓𝑣is the number of tuples
with value 𝑣, and𝑇is a defined threshold. It applies a hash function
ℎ(𝑣) : 𝑣↦→[0, 1]. If ℎ(𝑣) ≤𝑓𝑣
𝑇, it stores (𝑣, 𝑓𝑣) or not. Different
tables adopt the same hash function to correlate their sampling
decisions for tuples with low frequencies. Then the join size can
be estimated using stored (𝑣, 𝑓𝑣) pairs. However, it only supports
equi-join on two tables and cannot handle other filter conditions.
Notice, end-bias sampling is quite similar to bifocal sampling. The
difference is: the former uses a hash function to sample correlated
tuples and the latter uses the indexes. Both of them require an
extra pass through the data to compute the frequencies of the join
attribute values.
Yu et al. [105] introduce correlated sampling as a part of CS2
algorithm. They (1) choose one of the tables in a join graph as
the source table 𝑅1, (2) use a random sampling method to obtain
sample set 𝑆1 for 𝑅1 (mark 𝑅1 as visited), (3) follow an unvisited
edge < 𝑅𝑖, 𝑅𝑗> (𝑅𝑖is visited) in the join graph and collect the tuples
from 𝑅𝑗which are joinable with tuples in 𝑆𝑖as 𝑆𝑗, and (4) estimate
the join size over the samples. To support the query without source
tables, they propose a reverse estimator, which tracks to the source
tables to estimate the join size. However, due to the walking through
the join graph many times, it is time-consuming without indexes.
Furthermore, it requires an unpredictable large space to store the
samples.
Vengerov et al. [94] propose a correlated sampling method with-
out the prior knowledge of frequencies of join attributes, like
in [16, 25]. A tuple with join value 𝑣is included in the sample
set if ℎ(𝑣) < 𝑝, where 𝑝= 𝑛
𝑇, ℎ(𝑣) is a hash function similar in [16],
𝑛is the sample size, and 𝑇is the table size. Then, we can use ob-
tained samples to estimate the join size and handle specified filter
conditions. Furthermore, the authors extend the method into more
tables join and complex join conditions. In most cases, the cor-
related sampling has lower variance than independent Bernouli
sampling (t_cross), but when the values of many join attributes
occur with large frequencies, the Bernouli sampling is better. One
possible solution the authors propose is to adopt a one-pass algo-
rithm to detect the values with high frequencies,which is back to
the method in [16].
Through experiments, Chen and Yi [9] conclude that there does
not exist one sampling method suitable for all cases. They propose
a two-level sampling method, which is based on the independent
Bernouli sampling, end-bias sampling [16], and correlated sam-
pling [94]. Level-one sampling samples a value 𝑣from join attribute
domain into value set (𝑉), if ℎ(𝑣) < 𝑝𝑣. ℎis a hash function similar
to [16], 𝑝𝑣is a defined probability for value 𝑣. Before level-two
sampling, they sample a random tuple, called the sentry, for every
𝑣in 𝑉into tuple set. Level-two sampling samples tuples with value
𝑣(𝑣∈𝑉) with probability 𝑞. Then, we can estimate the join size
by using the tuple samples. Obviously, the first level is a correlated
sampling and the second level is independent Bernouli sampling.
The authors analyze how to set the 𝑝𝑣and 𝑞according to different
join types and the frequencies of values in join attributes.
Wang and Chan [95] extend [9] to a more general framework
in terms of five parameters. Based on the new framework, they
propose a new class of correlated sampling methods, called CSDL,
which is based on the discrete learning algorithm. A variant of
CSDL, CSDL-Opt has outperformed [9] when the samples are small
or join value density is small.
Wu et al. [100] adopt the online sampling to correct the possible
errors in the plan generated by the optimizers.
3.3
Learning-based Methods
Due to the capability of the learning-based methods, many re-
searchers have introduced a learning-based model to capture the
distribution and correlations of data. We classify them into: (1)
supervised methods, (2) unsupervised methods.
3.3.1
Supervised Methods. Malik et al. [64] group queries into
templates, and adopt machine learning techniques (e.g., linear re-
gression model, tree models) to learn the distribution of query result
sizes for each family. The features used in it include query attributes,
constants, operators, aggregates, and arguments to UDFs.
Park et al. [76] propose a model, QuickSel, in query-driven para-
digm, which is similar to [48, 58, 83], to estimate the selectivity of
one query. Instead of adopting the histograms, QuickSel introduces
the uniform mixture models to represent the distribution of the

A Survey on Advancing the DBMS Query Optimizer: Cardinality Estimation, Cost Model, and Plan Enumeration
Table 1: Learning-based methods for cardinality estimation.
Refs
Model
Model Count
Encoding
Multi-columns Multi-tables UDF Workload Shift
[64]
LR
1 Model/1 Template
predicates, arguments
✓
✓
✓
×
[76]
MixModel
1 Model
predicates
✓
×
×
✓
[91, 92]
BN
1 Model
predicates
✓
✓
×
×
[32]
BN
1 Model/1 Table
predicates
✓
×
×
×
[54]
NN
1 Model/1 UDF
arguments
×
×
✓
×
[61]
NN
1 Model
predicates
✓
×
×
×
[98]
NN/PR/MLR
1 Model/1 Subquery predicates, input cardinalities
✓
✓
✓
×
[50]
MSCN
1 Model
predicates, tables, joins
✓
✓
×
×
[14]
Tree-Ensemble/NN
1 Model
predicates
✓
×
×
×
[96, 97]
NN
1 Model/1 Template
predicates
✓
✓
×
×
[75]
DNN/RNN/Tree
1 Model
predicates, tables, joins
✓
✓
×
×
[85]
tree-LSTM
1 Model
predicate, operator, metadata
✓
✓
×
×
[39]
KDE
1 Model
samples
✓
×
×
✓
[49]
KDE
1 Model
1 Model / 1 Table
samples
✓
✓
×
✓
[41]
SPN
1 Model
tuples; predicates
✓
✓
×
✓
[36, 104]
Autoregression
1 Model
tuples; predicates
✓
×
×
✓
[103]
Autoregression
1 Model
tuples; predicates
✓
✓
×
✓
Table 2: A preliminary comparison in different methods for cardinality estimation.
Methods
Workload Shift Data Change Update Time Storage Usage Multi-Columns Multi-Tables
1-histogram[44]
×
×
Short
Small
×
×
d-histogram [30]
×
×
Short
Large
✓
×
Sampling [9, 95, 100]
✓
×
Medium
Large
✓
✓
Supervised Learning [50, 85]
×
×
Long
Small
✓
✓
Unsupervised Learning [41, 103]
✓
×
Long
Small
✓
✓
data. They train the model by minimizing the mean squared error
between the mixture model and a uniform distribution.
Tzoumas et al. [91, 92] build a Bayesian network and decompose
the complex statistics over multiple attributes into small one-/two-
dimensional statistics, which means the model captures dependen-
cies between two relations at most. They build the histograms for
these small dimensional statistics and adopt a dynamic program-
ming to calculate the selectivity for the new queries. Different with
previous method [26], it can handle more general joins and has a
more efficient construction algorithm because of capturing smaller
dependencies. However, the authors do not verify their method
with multiple tables join and in large dataset. Moreover, construct-
ing the two-dimensional statistics with attributes from different
tables needs the join operation. Halford et al. [32] also introduce a
method based on Bayesian network. To construct the model quickly,
they only factorize the distribution of attributes inside each relation
and use the previous assumptions for joins. However, they do not
present how well their method compared with [91, 92].
In 1998, Lakshmi and Zhou [54] first introduce the NN into the
cardinality estimation of user defined function (UDF), which the
histograms and other statistics cannot support. They design a two-
layer neural network (NN) and employ the back propagation to
update the model.
Liu et al. [61] formalize a selectivity function, 𝑆𝑒𝑙: 𝑅2𝑁↦→
𝑅, (𝑙1,𝑢1, ...,𝑙𝑛,𝑢𝑛) ↦→𝑐, where 𝑁is the number of attributes, 𝑙𝑖and
𝑢𝑖is the lower and upper bound on 𝑖𝑡ℎattribute for a query. They
employ a 3-layer NN to learn the selectivity function. To support >
and <, they add 2𝑁small NNs to produce 𝑙𝑖and 𝑢𝑖.
Wu et al. [98] use a learning-based method for workload in
shared clouds, where the queries are often recurring and overlap-
ping in nature. They first extract overlapping sub-graph templates
in multiple query graphs. Then, they learn the cardinality models
for those sub-graph templates.
Kipf et al. [50] introduce the multi-set convolutional network
(MSCN) model to estimate the cardinality of correlated joins. They
represent a query as a collection of a set of tables 𝑇, joins 𝐽, and
predicts 𝑃and build the separate 2-layer NN for each of them. Then,
the outputs of three NNs are concatenated after the averaging
operation and fed into the final output network. Deep sketch [51]
is built on [50] and is a wrapper of it.
Dutt et al. [14] formalize the estimation as a function similar
to [61], and they consider it as a regression problem. They adopt two
different approaches for the regression problem, NN-based methods
and tree-based ensembles. Different with [61], the authors also use
histograms and domain knowledge (e.g., AVI, EBO, and MinSel)
as the extra features in the models, which improve the estimation
accuracy. Due to the domain knowledge quickly updated when the
data distribution changes, the model is robust to the updates on the
datasets.
Woltmann et al. [97] think building a single NN, called global
model, over the entire database schema has the sparse encoding
and needs numerous samples to train the model. Thus, they build
different models, called local models, for different query templates.

Hai Lan, Zhifeng Bao, and Yuwei Peng*
Every local model adopts multi-layer perceptrons (MLP) to produce
the cardinality estimation. To collect the true cardinality, many
sample queries are issued during the training process, which is
time-consuming. Furthermore, Woltmann et al. [96] introduce the
method of pre-aggregating the base data using the data cube concept
and execute the example queries over this pre-aggregated data.
Ortiz et al. [75] empirically analyze various of deep learning
approaches used in cardinality estimation, including deep neural
network (DNN) and recurrent neural network (RNN). The DNN
model is similar with [97]. To adopt RNN model, the authors focus
on left-deep plans and model a query as a series of actions. Every
action represents an operation (i.e., selection or join). In each times-
tamp 𝑡, the model receives two inputs: 𝑥𝑡, the encoding of 𝑡𝑡ℎof
operation, and ℎ𝑡−1, the generated hidden state from timestamp
𝑡−1, which can be regarded as the encoding of a subquery and
captures the important details about the intermediate results.
Sun and Li [85] introduce a tree-LSTM model to learn a rep-
resentation of an operator and add an estimation layer upon the
tree-LSTM model to estimate the cardinality and cost simultane-
ously.
3.3.2
Unsupervised Methods. Heimel et al. [39] introduce the Ker-
nel Density Estimator (KDE) into estimating the selectivity on
single table with multiple predicates. They first adopt the Gaussian
Kernel and the bandwidth obtained by a certain rule to construct
the initial KDE, and then they use the history queries to choose
the optimal bandwidth by minimize the estimation error using
initial KDE. To support the shifts in workload and dataset, they
update the bandwidth after each incoming query and design the
new sample maintenance method for insert-only workload and
updates/deletions workload. Furthermore, in 2017, Kiefer et al. [49]
extend the method into estimating the selectivity of join. They
design two different models: single model over the join samples
and the models over the base tables, which does not need the join
operation and estimates the selectivity of join with the independent
assumption.
Yang et al. [104] propose a model called Naru, which adopts
the deep autoregressive model to produce 𝑛conditional densities
ˆ𝑃(𝑥𝑖|𝑥<𝑖) on a set of 𝑛-dimensional tuples. Then they estimate the
selectivity using the product rule:
ˆ𝑃(x) = ˆ𝑃(𝑥1,𝑥2, ...,𝑥𝑛)
= ˆ𝑃(𝑥𝑛|𝑥1, ...,𝑥𝑛−1) ˆ𝑃(𝑥𝑛−1|𝑥1, ...,𝑥𝑛−2)... ˆ𝑃(𝑥2|𝑥1) ˆ𝑃(𝑥1)
(1)
To support range conditions, they introduce a progressive sampling
method by sampling points from more meaningful region according
to the trained autoregressive model, which is robust to the skewed
data. Furthermore, they adopt the wildcard-skipping to handle
wildcard condition.
Hasan et al. [36] also adopt the deep autoregressive models and
introduce an adaptive sampling method to support range queries.
Compared with the Naru, the authors adopt the binary encoding
method and the sampling process runs parallelly, which leads the
model is smaller than Naru and makes the inference faster. Besides,
it can incorporate with the workload by assigning the tuples with
weights according to the workload when defining the cross-entropy
loss function.
Hilprecht et al. [41] introduce the Relational Sum Product Net-
work (RSPN) to capture the distribution of single attributes and the
joint probability distribution. They focus on Tree-SPNs, where one
leaf is the approximation of a single attribute, the internal node is
Sum node (splitting the rows into clusters) or Product node (split-
ting the columns of one cluster). To support cardinality estimation
of join, they build the RSPN over the join results.
Yang et al. [103] extend their previous work, Naru, to support
joins. They build an autoregressive model over the full outer join of
all tables. They introduce the lossless column factorization for large-
cardinality columns and employ the join count table to support any
queries on the subset of tables.
3.4
Our Insights
3.4.1
Summaries. The basic histogram types (e.g., equi-width, equi-
depth, d-dimensional) have been introduced before 2000. Recent
studies mainly focus on how to quickly construct the histograms
and to improve the accuracy of them. Updating the histograms
by query feedback is a good approach to improve the quality of
histograms. However, there are still two limitations in the his-
tograms: (1) the storage size increases dramatically when build-
ing a d-dimensional histograms; (2) histograms cannot capture the
correlation between attributes from different tables. If building a
histogram for the attributes from different tables, the join operation
is required, like in [91, 92] and it is difficult to update this histogram.
Sketch can be used to estimate the distinct count of an attribute
or the cardinality of equi-join results. However, it cannot support
more general cases well, e.g., join with filters. Synopsis-based meth-
ods cannot estimate the size of final or intermediate relations when
one or both of the child relations is an intermediate relation.
Sampling is a good approach to capture the correlations between
different tables. However, when the tuples in tables have been
updated, the samples may become out-of-date. Sampling-based
methods also suffer from the storage used to store the samples and
the time used to retrieve the samples, especially when the original
data is numerous. Furthermore, current sampling methods only
support the equi-join.
The supervised learning methods are mostly query-driven, which
means the model is trained for a specific workload. If the workload
shifts, the model needs to be retrained. Thus, the data-driven (un-
supervised learning) approaches come out, which still can estimate
the cardinality even if the workload shifts. As shown in [104] (Sec-
tion 6.3), Naru is robust to workload shift while MSCN and KDE are
sensitive to the training queries. Moreover, both of the supervised
and unsupervised learning methods suffer from the data change. As
presented in [103] (Section 7.6) and [85] (Section 7.5), both of them
are sensitive to data change and the models will be updated in an
incremental mode or retrained from scratch. However, they only
consider that new tuples are appended into one table and there
does not exist delete or update operation.
Due to the difference in the experiment settings, we only present
a preliminary comparison between the methods for cardinality
estimation as shown in Table 2. Sometimes, the size of learning-
based methods is still not small as presented in [103]. The state-of-
the-art method is [103], which shows superiority compared with
other methods in their experiments.

A Survey on Advancing the DBMS Query Optimizer: Cardinality Estimation, Cost Model, and Plan Enumeration
3.4.2
Possible Future Directions. There are several possible direc-
tions as follows:
(1) Learning-based methods. Many studies on cardinality es-
timation are learning-based methods in last two years. The
learning-based models currently integrated a real system are
the light model or one model for one (sub-)query graph [14,
98], which can be trained and updated quickly. However, the
accuracy and generality of these models are limited. More
complex models (achieve a better accuracy) still suffer from
the long training time and update time. Training time is in-
fluenced by the hardware. For example, it only takes several
minutes in [103], while it is 13 hours in [85] using a GPU
with relatively poor performance. A database instance, espe-
cially in the cloud environment, is in a resource-constrained
environment. How to train the model efficiently should be
considered. The interaction between the models and the opti-
mizer also needs to be considered, which should not be with
too much overhead on the database systems [14]. As pre-
sented above, current proposed methods for data change can-
not handle delete or update operation. A possible method is
to adopt the idea of active learning to update the model [63].
(2) Hybrid methods. Query-driven methods are sensitive to
workload. Although data-driven methods can support more
queries, it may not achieve the best accuracy for all queries.
How to combine two methods in these two different catalogs
is a possible direction. Actually, the previous query-feedback
histograms is an instance of this case. Another interesting
thing is that utilizing the query feedback information will
help the model be aware of the data change.
(3) Experimental Study. Although many methods have been
proposed, it lacks of experimental studies to verify these
methods. Different methods have different characteristics
as shown in Table 2. It is crucial to conduct a comprehen-
sive experimental study for proposed methods. We think
the following aspects should be included: (1) is it easy to
integrate the method into a real database system; (2) what
is the performance of the method under different workload
patterns (e.g., static or dynamic workload, OLTP or OLAP)
and different data scales and distributions; (3) researchers
should pay attention to the trade-off between storage us-
age and accuracy of candidate estimation and the trade-off
between efficiency of model update and the accuracy.
4
COST MODEL
In this section, we present the researches proposed to solve the
limitations in the cost model. We classify the methods into three
groups: (1) improving the capability of the existed cost model, (2)
building a new cost model, and (3) predicting the query performance.
We include the work on the single query performance prediction.
Because the cost used in the optimizer is the metric for performance.
These methods are possibly integrated into the cost-based optimizer
and replace the cost model to estimation the cost of a (sub)plan,
like in [67]. However, we do not consider the query performance
prediction under concurrent context (e.g., [108]). On the one hand,
the concurrent queries existing during the optimization may be
quite different with queries during the execution process. On the
Figure 3: A classification of cost estimation methods
other hand, it also needs to collect more information than the
model predicting the performance of a single query. We list the
representative work of in the cost model in Figure 3.
4.1
Quality Improvement of Existing Cost
Model
Several studies try to estimate the cost of UDF [3, 37, 38]. Boulos and
Ono [3] execute the UDF several times with different input values,
collect the different costs, and then use these costs to build a multi-
dimensional histogram. The histogram is stored in a tree structure.
When estimating the UDF with specific parameters, traverse the
tree top-down to get the estimated cost to locate the leaf with
similar parameters with inputs. However, this method needs to
know the upper and lower bounds of every parameter and it cannot
solve the complex relation between input parameters and the costs.
Unlike the static histogram used in [3], He et al. [37] introduce
a dynamic quadtree-based approach to store the UDF execution
information. When a query is executed, the actual cost of executing
the UDF is used to update the cost model. He et al. [38] introduce
a memory-limited K-nearest neighbors (MLKNN) method. They
design a data structure, called PData, to store the execution cost
and a multidimensional index used for fast retrieval k nearest PData
for a given query point (parameter in UDF) and fast insertion of
new PData.
Liu and Blanas [60] introduce a cost model for hash-based join
for main-memory database. They model the response time of a
query as being proportional to the number of operations weighted
by the costs of four basic access patterns. They first adopt the
microbenchmarks to get the cost of each access pattern and then
model the cost of sequential scan, hash join, hash join with different
orders by the basic access patterns.
Most of the previous cost models only consider the execution
cost, which may be not reasonable in the cloud environments. The
users of the cloud database systems care about the economic cost.
Karampaglis et al. [47] first propose a bi-objective query cost model,
which is used to derive running time and monetary cost together
in the multi-cloud environment. They model the execution time
based on the method in [99]. For economic cost estimation, they
first model the charging policies and estimate the monetary cost
by combining the policy and time estimation.

Hai Lan, Zhifeng Bao, and Yuwei Peng*
4.2
Cost Model Alternatives
The cost model is a function mapping the (sub)plan with annotated
information to a scalar (cost). Because a neural network on data
primarily approximates the unknown underlying mapping function
from inputs to outputs, most of the methods used to replace the
origin cost model are learning-based, especially NN-based.
Boulos et al. [4] firstly introduce the neural network for cost
evaluation. They design two different models: a single large neural
network for every query type and a single small neural network
for every operator. In the first model, they also train another model
to classify a query in a certain type. The output of the first model
is the cost of a (sub)plan, while the second model needs to add up
the outputs from small models to get the cost.
Sun and Li [85] adopt a tree-LSTM model to learn the presenta-
tion of an operator and add an estimation layer upon the tree-LSTM
model to estimate the cost of the query plan.
Due to the difficulty in collecting statistics and the needs of
picking the resources in big data systems, particularly in modern
cloud data services, Siddiqui et al. [81] propose a learning-based
cost model and integrate it into the optimizer of SCOPE [7]. They
build large number of small models to predict the costs of common
(sub)queries, which are extracted from the workload history. The
features encoded into the models are quite similar with [98]. More-
over, to support resource-aware query planning, they add number
of partitions allocated to the operator into the features. In order
to improve the coverage of the models, they introduce operator-
input models and operator-subgraphApprox models and employ
a meta-ensemble model to combine the models above as the final
model.
4.3
Query Performance Prediction
The performance of the one query mainly refers to the latency. Wu
et al. [99] adopt an offline profiling to calibrate the coefficients in the
cost model under a specific hardware and software conditions. Then,
they adopt the sampling method to obtain the true cardinalities of
the physical operators to predict the execution times.
Ganapathi et al. [23] adopt the Kernel Canonical Correlation
Analysis (KCCA) into the resource estimation, e.g. CPU time. They
only model the plan level information, e.g. the number of each
physical operator type and their cardinality, which is too vulnerable.
To estimate the resources (CPU time and logical I/O times), Li
et al. [57] train a boosted regression tree for every operator in the
database and the consumption of the plan is the sum of the opera-
tors’. To make the model more robust, they train a separate scaling
function for every operator and combine scaling functions with the
regression models to handle the cases when the data distribution,
size or queries’ parameters are quite different with the training
data. Different with [23], this is an operator-level model.
Akdere et al. [2] propose the learning-based models to predict
the query performance. They first design a plan-level model if the
workload is known in advance and an operator-level model. Consid-
ering the plan-level model makes highly accurate prediction and the
operator-level generalizes well, for queries with low operator-level
prediction accuracy, they train models for specific query subplans
using plan-level modeling and compose both types of models to
predict the performance of the entire plan. However, the models
adopted are linear.
Marcus and Papaemmanouil [68] introduce a plan-structure neu-
ral network to predict the query’s latency. They design a small
neural network, called neural unit, for every logic operator and any
instance of the same logic operator shares the same network. Then,
these neural units are combined into a tree shape according to the
plan tree. The output of one neural unit consists of two parts, the
latency of current operator and the information sent to its parent
node. The latency of the root neural unit of a plan is the plan’s
latency.
Neo [67] is a learning-based query optimizer, which introduces
a neural network, called value network, to estimate the latency
of (sub)plan. The query-level encoding (join graph and columns
with predicts) is fed through several full-connected layers and then
concatenated with the plan level encoding, which is a tree vector
to represent the physical plan. Next, the concatenated vector is fed
into a Tree Convolution and another several full-connected layers
to predict the latency of the input physical plan.
4.4
Our Insights
4.4.1
Summaries. The methods trying to improve the existing cost
model focus on different aspects, e.g., UDFs, hash join in main mem-
ory. These studies leave us an important lesson: when introducing
a new logical or physical operator, or re-implementing the existing
physical operators, we should consider how to add them into the
optimization process and design the corresponding cost estimation
formulas for them (e.g., [55, 71]).
Leaning-based methods adopt the model to capture the complex
relationship between cost and the factors while the traditional cost
model is defined as a certain formula by the database experts. The
NN-based methods used to predict the performance, estimate cost,
and estimate cardinality in Section 3.3.1 are quite similar in the
features and models selection. For example, Sun and Li [85] use the
same model to estimate the cost and cardinality and Neo [67] uses
the latency (performance) of (sub)plan as the cost. A model, which
is able to capture the data itself, operator level information, and
subplan information, can predict the cost accurately. For example,
the work [85], one of the state-of-the-art methods, adopts the tree-
LSTM model to capture the information mentioned above. However,
all of them are supervised methods. If the workload shifts or the
data is updated the models need to be retrained from the scratch.
4.4.2
Possible Future Directions. There are two possible directions
as follows:
(1) Cloud database systems. The users of the cloud database
systems need to meet their latency or throughput at the low-
est price. Integrating the economic cost of running queries
into the cost model is a possible direction. It is interesting
to consider these related information into the cost model.
For example, Siddiqui et al. [81] consider the number of
container into their cost model.
(2) Learning-based methods. Learning-based methods to es-
timate the cost also suffer from the same problems with
methods in cardinality estimation (Section 3.4.2). The model
that has been adopted in a real system is a light model [81].
The trade-off between accuracy and training time is still a

A Survey on Advancing the DBMS Query Optimizer: Cardinality Estimation, Cost Model, and Plan Enumeration
problem. The possible solutions adopted in cardinality esti-
mation also can be used in the cost model.
5
PLAN ENUMERATION
In this section, we present the researches published to handle the
problems in plan enumeration. We classify the work on plan enu-
meration into two groups, non-learning methods and learning-
based methods.
5.1
Non-learning Methods
In 1997, Steinbrunn et al. [84] proposed a representative survey
for selecting an optimal join orders. Thus, we mainly focus on the
researches after 1997.
5.1.1
Dynamic Programming. Selinger et al. [79] propose a dy-
namic programming algorithm to select the optimal join order for
a given conjunctive query. They generate the plan in the order
of increasing size and restrict the search space to left-deep trees,
which significantly speeds up the optimization. Vance and Maier
[93] propose a dynamic programming algorithm to find the opti-
mal join order by considering different partial table sets. They use
it to generate the optimal bushy tree join trees containing cross
products. [79, 93] are generate-and-test paradigm and most of the
operations are used to check whether the subgraphs are connected
and two subgraphs are combinative. Thus, none of them meet
the lower bound in [74]. Moerkotte and Neumann [69] propose a
graph-based Dynamic programming algorithm. They first intro-
duce a graph-based method to generate the connected subgraph.
Thus, it does not need to check out the connection and combina-
tions and perform more efficiently. Then, they adopt DP over them
for the generation of optimal bushy tree without cross products.
Moerkotte and Neumann [70] extend the method in [69] to deal
with non-inner joins and a more generalized graph, hyper graph,
where join predicates can involve more than two relations.
5.1.2
Top-down Strategies. TDMinCutLazy is the first efficient
top-down join enumeration algorithm proposed by DeHaan and
Tompa [13]. They utilize the idea of minimal cuts to partition a join
graph and introduce two different pruning strategies, predicted cost
bounding and accumulated cost bounding into top-down partition-
ing search, which can avoid exhaustive enumeration. Top-down
method is almost as efficient as dynamic programming and has
other tempting properties, e.g., pruning, interesting order. Fender
and Moerkotte [18] propose an alternative top-down join enumera-
tion strategy (TDMinCutBranch). TDMinCutBranch introduces a
graph-based enumeration strategy which only generates the valid
join, i.e. cross-product free partitions, unlike TDMinCutLazy which
adopts a generate-and-test approach. In the following year, Fender
et al. [21] propose another top-down enumeration strategy TD-
MinCutConservative which is easier to implement and gives better
runtime performance in comparison to TDMinCutBranch. Further-
more, Fender and Moerkotte [19, 20] present a general framework
to handle non-inner joins and a more generalized graph, hyper
graph for top-down join enumeration. RS-Graph, a new join trans-
formation rules based on top-down join enumeration, is presented
in [80] to efficiently generate the space of cross-product free join
trees.
Figure 4: One possible join order episode
5.1.3
Large Queries. For large queries, Greedy Operator Order-
ing [17] builds the bushy join trees bottom-up by adding the most
profitable (with the smallest intermediate join size) joins first. To
support large queries, Kossmann and Stocker [52] propose two
different incremental dynamic programming methods, IDP-1 and
IDP-2. With a given size k, IDP-1 runs the algorithm in [79] to
construct the cheapest plan with that size and then regards it as
a base relation, and repeats the process. With a given size k, in
every iteration, IDP-2 first performs a greedy algorithm to con-
struct the join tree with k tables and then runs DP on the generated
join tree to produce the optimal plan, regards the plan as a base
relation, and then repeats the process. Neumann [72] proposes a
two-stage algorithm: First, it performs the query simplification to
restrict the query graph by the greedy heuristic until the graph
becomes tractable for DP, and then it runs a DP algorithm to find
the optimal join orders for the simplified the join graph. Bruno et al.
[5] introduce enumerate-rank-merge framework which generalizes
and extends the previous heuristics [17, 86]. The enumeration step
considers the bushy trees. The ranking step is used to evaluate
the best join pair each step, which adopts the min-size metric. The
merging step constructs the selected join pair. Neumann and Radke
[73] divide the queries into three types: small queries, medium, and
large queries according to their query graph type and the number
of tables. Then, they adopt DP to solve small queries, restrict the
DP by linearizing the search space for medium queries, and use the
idea in [52] for large queries.
5.1.4
Others. Trummer and Koch [89] transform the join ordering
problem into a mixed integer linear program to minimize the cost
of the plan and adopt the existing the MILP solvers to obtain a
linear join tree (left-deep tree). To satisfy the linear properties in
MILP, they approximate the cost of scan and join operations via
linear functions.
Most of existed OLAP systems mainly focus on start/snowfake
join queries (PK-FK join relation) and generate the left-deep binary
join tree. When handling FK-FK join, like in TPC-DS (snowstorm
schema), they inccur a large number of intermediate results. Nam
et al. [71] introduce a new n-ary join operator, which extends the
plan space. They define the core graph to represent the FK-FK joins
in the join graph and adopt the n-ary join operator to process it.
They design a new cost model for this operator and integrate it into
an existed OLAP systems.
5.2
Learning-based Methods
All learning-based methods adopt the reinforcement learning (DL).
In RL, an agent interacts with environment by actions and rewards.

Hai Lan, Zhifeng Bao, and Yuwei Peng*
At each step 𝑡, the agent uses a policy 𝜋to choose an action 𝑎𝑡
according to the current state 𝑠𝑡and transitions to a new state 𝑠𝑡+1.
Then the environment applies the action 𝑎𝑡and returns a reward
𝑟𝑡to the agent. The goal of RL is to learn a policy 𝜋, a function that
automatically takes an action based on the current state, with the
maximum long-term reward. In join order selection, state is the
current sub-trees, and action is to combine two sub-trees, like in
Figure 4. The reward of intermediate action is 0 and the reward of
the last action is the cost or latency of the query.
ReJoin [66] adopts the deep reinforcement learning (DRL), which
has widely been adopted in other areas, e.g., influence maximiza-
tion [87], to identify the optimal join orders. State in DRL represent
the current subtrees. Each action will combine two subtrees to-
gether into a single tree. It uses cost obtained from the cost model
in optimizer as the reward. ReJoin encodes the tree structure of
(sub)plan, join predicates, and selection predicates in state. Different
with [66], Heitz and Stockinger [40] create a matrix to represent a
table or a subquery in each row and adopt the cost model in [56] to
quickly obtain the cost of one query. DQ [53] is also a DRL-based
method. It uses one-hot vectors to encode the visible attributes in
the (sub)query. DQ also encodes the choice of physical operator by
adding another one-hot vector. When training the model, DQ first
uses the cost observed from the cost model of the optimizer and
then fine-tunes the model with true running time. Yu et al. [106]
adopt DRL and tree-LSTM together for join order selection. Differ-
ent with the previous methods [40, 53, 66], tree-LSTM can capture
more the structure information of the query tree. Similar with [53],
they also use cost to train the model and then switch to running
time as feedback for fine-tuning. Notice, they also discuss how to
handle the changes in the database schema, e.g. adding/deleting
the tables/columns. SkinnerDB [90] adopts the UCT, a reinforce-
ment learning algorithm, and learns from the current query, while
the previous learning-based join order methods are learning from
previous queries. It divides the execution of one query into many
small slices where different small slices may choose the different
join order and learn from the previous execution slices.
5.3
Our Insights
5.3.1
Summaries. The non-learning based studies focus on im-
proving the efficiency and the ability (to handle the more general
join cases) of the existing approaches. Compared with dynamic
programming approach, the top-down strategy is tempting due
to the better extensibility, e.g., adding new transformation rules,
branch-and-bound pruning. Both of them have been implemented
in many database systems.
Compared with the non-leaning methods, learning-based ap-
proaches have a fast planning time. All learning-based methods
employ reinforcement learning. The main differences between them
are:(1) choosing which information as the state and how to encode
them, (2) adopting which models. A more complicated model with
more related information can achieve better performance. The state-
of-the-art method [106] adopts a tree-LSTM model similar with [85]
to generate the representation of a subplan. Due to the inaccuracy
in the cost model, it can improve the quality of model by using
the latency to fine-tune the model. Although current state-of-the-
art method [106] outperforms the non-learning based methods as
shown in their experiments, how to integrate the learning-based
method into the real system must be solved.
5.3.2
Possible Future Directions. There are two possible directions
as follows:
(1) Handle large queries. All methods proposed to handle
large queries are DP-based methods in the bottom-up man-
ner. A question is remaining: how to make the top-down
search strategy support the large queries. Besides, the state-
of-art method for large queries [73] cannot support the gen-
eral join cases.
(2) Learning-based methods. Current leaned methods only
focus on the PK-FK join and the join type is inner join. How
to handle the other join cases is a possible direction. None of
the proposed methods have discussed how to integrate them
into a real system. In their experiments, they implement
the method as a separate component to get the right join
order, and then send to the database. The database still need
to optimize it to get the final physical plan. If a query has
subquery, they may interact multiple times. The reinforce-
ment learning methods are trained in a certain environment,
which refers to a certain database in the join order selection
problem. How to handle the changes in the table schemas
and data is also a possible direction.
6
CONCLUSION
Cardinality estimation, cost model, and plan enumeration play
critical roles to generate an optimal execution plan in a cost-based
optimizer. In this paper, we review the work proposed to improve
their qualities, including the traditional and learning-based methods.
Besides, we provide possible future directions respectively.
We observe that more and more learning-based methods are
introduced and outperform traditional methods. However, they
suffer from long training and updating time. How to make the
models robust to workload shifts and data changes or to update
models quickly is still an open question. Traditional methods with
theoretical guarantees are widely adopted in real systems. There
is a great possibility of improving traditional methods with new
algorithms and data structures. Moreover, We believe the ideas
behind the traditional methods can be used to enhance the learning-
based methods.
