arXiv:1005.0180v1  [nlin.PS]  3 May 2010
Transformation between dense and sparse spirals in symmetrical
bistable media
Ya-feng He1,2, Bao-quan Ai1,4, and Bambi Hu1,3
1Department of Physics, Centre for Nonlinear Studies,
The Beijing-Hong Kong-Singapore Joint Centre
for Nonlinear and Complex Systems (Hong Kong),
Hong Kong Baptist University, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong, China
2College of Physics Science and Technology,
Hebei University, Baoding 071002, China
3Department of Physics, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204-5005, USA
4 Laboratory of Quantum Information Technology, ICMP and SPTE,
South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China.
(Dated: November 9, 2018)
Abstract
Transformation between dense and sparse spirals is studied numerically based on a bistable
FitzHugh-Nagumo model. It is found that the dense spiral can transform into two types of sparse
spirals via a subcritical bifurcation: Positive Phase Sparse Spiral (PPSS) and Negative Phase Sparse
Spiral (NPSS). The choice of the two types of sparse spirals after the transformation is aﬀected
remarkably by the boundary eﬀect if a small domain size is applied. Moreover, the boundary eﬀect
gives rise to novel meandering of sparse spiral with only outward petals.
PACS numbers:
82.40.Ck, 47.54.-r, 05.45.-a
Keywords: spiral wave, pattern formation, bistable media
1

I.
INTRODUCTION
Pattern formation has been of great interest in a variety of physical, chemical, and bio-
logical contexts.1–5 Of particular interests are spiral waves because more and more evidence
indicates that sudden cardiac death is related with the spiral waves in heart.6 From the
ﬁrst observation in Belousov-Zhabotinsky reaction, spiral waves had been widely studied in
excitable, bistable, and oscillation media.7–15 Most researches of spiral waves are focused on
the excitable systems with diﬀerent excitabilities.16–18 Generally, spiral waves exhibit two
types of appearances: dense spiral and sparse spiral.19,20 Dense spiral waves occur in media
with normal excitability while sparse spiral waves appear in media with low excitability. The
spiral waves always appear with the form of pulses because excitable media cannot support
a single front. However, in bistable media a front can exist individually. The spiral wave
in bistable media consists of a couple of Bloch fronts which propagate in opposite direc-
tions. An analytical relation about the velocity and the curvature of the Bloch fronts was
obtained.15 Numerical simulations shown that dense (sparse) spiral occurs in a symmetric
(asymmetric) bistable system.21,22 In oscillation media the spiral waves are phase waves and
exhibit dense spirals.
In a bistable ferrocyanide-iodate-sulﬁte reaction, spirals, oscillating spot, and labyrinthine
patterns have been observed.23–26 The spirals occur in the Bloch region beyond the Nonequi-
librium Ising-Bloch (NIB) bifurcation. It is sparse spiral and results from an axisymmetry
breaking of a shrinking ring. The oscillating spots appear near but before the NIB bifur-
cation. The labyrinthine pattern originates from transverse instability of a chemical front
in Ising region. The similar patterns were also observed by Kepper et al24. However, they
obtained dense spiral. The observed dynamics of patterns can be explained successfully in
terms of a NIB bifurcation in a generic FitzHugh-Nagumo model21,22.
Dense and sparse spiral waves have been investigated individually in those media. The
behaviors of both dense and sparse spirals have been well understood. However, the trans-
formation process between dense and sparse spirals is still unclear. In the present work we
will focus on this transformation by studying numerically a symmetrical bistable FitzHugh-
Nagumo model. The spiral waves are obtained in Bloch region. It is found that the dense
spirals can transit into two types of sparse spirals. We also observe novel meandering of
sparse spiral with only outward petal which originates from boundary eﬀects.
2

II.
BISTABLE MEDIA MODEL
This work is based on a modiﬁed FitzHugh-Nagumo model,
ut = au −u3 −v + ∇2u,
(1)
vt = ε(u −v) + δ∇2v,
(2)
here variables u and v represent the concentrations of the activator and inhibitor, respec-
tively, and δ denotes the ratio of their diﬀusion coeﬃcients. The small value ε characterizes
the time scales of the two variables, where v remains approximately constant vf on the
length scale over which u varies. The system described by Eqs.(1) and (2) can be excitable,
Turing-Hopf, or bistable type. In this paper the parameter a is chosen such that the system
is bistable. The two stationary and uniform stable states are indicated by up state (u+,v+)
and down state (u−,v−), respectively, and they are symmetric, (u+, v+)=−(u−, v−). A front
(interface) connects the two stable states smoothly. On decreasing ε the system follows NIB
bifurcation that leads to the formation of a couple of Bloch fronts. In the followings, we
deﬁne a front which jumps from down to up state (vf<0, the planar front velocity cnf),
and a back which falls from up to down state (vf>0, the planar back velocity cnb). Here
the front and the back correspond to the two Bloch fronts. So the image of bistable spiral
wave is clear: a couple of Bloch fronts (front and back) propagating with opposite velocities
enclose a spiral arm, and the front meets the back at the spiral tip at where vf(b)=0 and
u=v=0. In order to diﬀerentiate the obtained dense and sparse spiral waves, we deﬁne an
order parameter α = | λ+−λ−
λ++λ−|, here λ+ and λ−present the average widths of up state and
down state, respectively, which can be served as an indicator of duty ratio of spiral wave
in a simple way. In dense spiral case, α=0 which means that the up and down states own
identical widths [as Fig. 1 (c) indicated]. In sparse spiral case, if λ+>λ−we call it Negative
Phase Sparse Spiral [NPSS, Fig.1 (d)]. Otherwise if λ+<λ−we call it Positive Phase Sparse
Spiral [PPSS, Fig. 1(e)-(g)].
Because pattern formations in bistable media are sensitive to the initial conditions and
boundary conditions, we adopt two types of ﬁxed initial conditions during numerical sim-
ulations as shown in Fig.1 (a) and (b). In order to investigate the transformation process
between the dense and sparse spirals, we use Fig.1 (a) [Fig.1 (b)] as the initial condition
when increasing (decreasing) ε, which ﬁrstly evolves into dense (sparse) spiral. The bound-
3

ary conditions are taken to be no-ﬂux. The simulation is done in a two-dimensional (2D)
Cartesian coordinate system with diﬀerent grid sizes. A generalized Peaceman-Rachford
ADI scheme is used to integrate the above model with a space step dx=dy=0.3 length unit
and a time step dt=0.05 time unit. Unless otherwise noted, our simulations are under the
parameter sets: a=2.0, δ=0.1.
III.
SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A.
Bifurcation scenario of bistable spiral waves
FIG. 1: Evolution of spiral waves and tip paths with increasing ε. (a) symmetric (b) asymmetric
initial conditions. (c) dense spiral, ε=0.3; (d) NPSS, ε=0.33; (e)-(g) PPSS, ε=0.34, 0.42, 0.4385;
(h) uniform state, ε=0.439; (i) corresponding tip paths. The dash (solid) lines in (a) and (b)
present the contour lines u=0 (v=0). The dash circle in (i) corresponding to (h) represents a rough
tip trajectory of spiral which travels outside the domain. In order to illustrate the meandering of
sparse spiral a small domain size is used: 64×64 s.u.
Figure 1 shows the bifurcation scenarios of spiral waves and tip trajectories with increasing
ε. Here, we use a small domain size 64×64 s.u. in order to illustrate the boundary-induced
spiral meandering simultaneously. It can be seen that, upon increasing ε, the system follows
dense spiral - sparse spiral - meandering of sparse spiral - sparse spiral - uniform state.
When ε<0.33, the spiral wave is dense [Fig. 1(c)], and the spiral tip is a ﬁxed point. When
ε exceeds the critical value εc=0.33 the dense spirals transform into either PPSS or NPSS.
The order parameter α increases with ε. After this transformation the tip of sparse spiral
4

begins to travel and traces out a circle with primary radius r1 as the spiral wave rotating as
indicated in Fig. 1(i). The radius r1 increases with ε as shown in Fig. 2. When ε approaches
roughly 0.404, we observe the meandering of spiral waves. A secondary circle appears on
the trajectory due to the meandering and the primary circle (radius r1) orbits the secondary
circle (radius r2) in anticlockwise direction with frequency f2. The primary circle spins about
its center in clockwise direction with frequency f1. The radius of secondary circle r2 reduces
upon increasing ε. When the parameter ε reaches a critical value 0.445, the meandering of
spiral waves disappears and r2=0. If ε exceeds this value the spiral tip travels outside the
domain, so one obtains uniform state (either up state or down state).
0.32
0.36
0.40
0.44
0.48
0
8
16
24
32
40
 
 
r
1
 51.2
 64
 80
 120
 160
FIG. 2: Dependence of the radius r1 on parameter ε under diﬀerent domain sizes. The numbers
in the label present the domain sizes.
Figure 3 gives a two-parameter numerical bifurcation diagram of spiral waves in a ﬁnite
domain. The below line L1 separates the dense spiral and sparse spiral, and it keeps con-
stant while changing the domain sizes. There exists a parameter range corresponding the
meandering of sparse spiral as indicated by the gray region in Fig. 3. This region changes
with domain sizes. If the system is large enough, for example 160×160 s.u., this region
reduces to a line which separates the sparse spiral and the uniform state. So the observed
meandering of sparse spiral is induced by the boundary eﬀect.
As indicated in Fig. 1, the dense spiral can transit into either PPSS or NPSS as increasing
ε. In order to study the choice of NPSS or PPSS after the transformation, we do extensive
simulation with diﬀerent parameter sets: ε, a, and domain sizes. For example, given ﬁxed
parameters: domain size 64×64 s.u., a=2 as shown in Fig. 1, we try to connect the spiral
type with the parameter ε. However, at diﬀerent ε, the dense spiral transforms into diﬀerent
5

1.6
2.4
3.2
4.0
0.18
0.24
0.30
0.36
0.42
0.48
L1
D
M
L3
L2
U
 
 
a
FIG. 3: Two-parameter numerical bifurcation diagram of spiral waves. The region between lines
L1 and L3 presents sparse spirals. The gray region M indicates meandering sparse spirals. The
regions D and U denote Dense spirals and Uniform states, respectively. Domain size: 64×64 s.u.
FIG. 4: Phase diagram of the sparse spirals spanned by the domain size and the parameter a. This
diagram presents the choice of NPSS or PPSS after the transformation as increasing ε. R denotes
Ruleless choice. P (N) indicates PPSS (NPSS). The dashed line divides roughly the states of sparse
spirals after the transformation into two regions, above which the choice is always Ruleless.
types of sparse spirals. We don’t ﬁnd rule about how the parameter ε determines the type
of sparse spiral. Here we denote this transformation as Ruleless choice. Nevertheless, at
some speciﬁc parameters, the dense spiral always transits into one type of sparse spiral,
either PPSS or NPSS. For example, given domain size 64×64, a=3, the dense spiral always
transits into NPSS at diﬀerent ε. We give a phase diagram of the spiral types as shown in
Fig. 4, in which R represents Ruleless choice, P (N) indicates the PPSS (NPSS). It is shown
that if the domain size is large enough (roughly, the region above the dash line) dense spiral
6

evolves into either PPSS or NPSS as changing ε. The transformed states PPSS and NPSS
can be regarded as two stable states of system after the bifurcation. Without forcing (for
large domain sizes), the choice is ruleless due to the spontaneous symmetry breakdown. For
smaller domain size, however, this choice tends to be unique after the transformation. It is
obvious that this choice originates from boundary eﬀects.
We want to mention that Fig.
4 shows a phase diagram with diﬀerent parameters.
However, given a set of parameters, the choice is deterministic. For example, given domain
size 64×64 s.u., a=2.0, ε=0.33, the initial dense spiral will transform into NPSS as shown
in Fig. 1 (d). So, if decreasing ε from 0.33 to 0.3 then increasing to 0.34, one can turn a
NPSS into dense spiral then into PPSS. This process changes the duty ratio of spiral waves.
It is helpful to adjusting the duration of a cardiac action potential to prevent the atrial
ﬁbrillation.6
Sparse spiral can also evolve into dense spiral as decreasing ε. From the given asymmetric
initial condition [Fig. 1(b)], it ﬁrst develops into sparse spiral. When ε<0.315 this sparse
spiral further evolves into dense spiral.
We want to mention that, as shown in Fig.
1
when increasing ε, the transition from dense to sparse spiral occurs at ε=0.33. So, this
transformation is bistable with respect to ε, and originates from a subcritical bifurcation.
This transformation process is very diﬀerent from that in excitable media,19,27 in which
the transformation between sparse and dense spirals is smooth. The present phenomena
attribute to the intrinsic characteristics of the bistable system.
B.
Transformation details from dense spiral to sparse spiral
Because this transformation is bistable, here, we focus on the transformation details from
dense spiral to sparse spiral. When the parameter ε has exceeded εc, the system with the
given symmetric initial condition [Fig. 1 (a)] evolves ﬁrst into dense spiral, then into sparse
spiral. We study the transformation in detail by measuring the intensity change of variable
u and v at a ﬁxed point far away from the spiral tip and the domain boundary as shown in
Fig. 5. It can be seen that the period of sparse spiral T1 is always larger than that of dense
spiral T0. There exists a critical period Tc (interval of u+) at which the transformation from
dense spiral to sparse spiral occurs. It is found that the diﬀerences between T0 and Tc are
7

related to the choice of PPSS or NPSS,





T0 < Tc, PPSS,
T0 > Tc, NPSS.
0
100
200
300
-1.6
-0.8
0.0
0.8
1.6
T
1
T
c
T
0
 
 
u, v
t
FIG. 5: Time sequence of variable u and v around the transformation point for NPSS. Solid line
and dash line present u and v, respectively. T0 and T1 are the periods of dense spiral and sparse
spiral, respectively. Tc indicates a critical period.
The appearance of Tc indicates the change in velocities of both the front and the back.
For the case of small ε and δ, Eqs. (1) and (2) reduce to
ut = au −u3 −vi + ∇2u,
(3)
v = vi(i = f, b),
(4)
here vi is the value of the inhibitor at the front or the back.
From Eqs.(3) and (4) we
can obtain the velocity of the planar front (back) cni=−
3
√
2avi(i=f,b).
So the value vi
determines uniquely the velocity of front (back). For dense spiral, the front and the back
are symmetry except an angle separation of π and travel at the same speed, |vb|=|vf|. The
interaction between the front and the back is negligible. Undergoing a subcritical bifurcation
the symmetry between the front and the back breaks down. Here, if |vf|>|vb|, the front
speeds up, so the measured critical period Tc would be less than T0. The accelerated wave
front approaches and interacts with the back to form a NPSS. On the contrary, if |vb|>|vf|
the back speeds up, so Tc>T0 and a PPSS will appear.
8

The velocities of both the front and the back are also restricted by the eikonal rela-
tion which amends the velocity diﬀerence between the front and the back induced by the
symmetry breakdown,
ci = cni(vi) −Dκi.
(5)
here, κi indicates the local curvature. For NPSS (PPSS) the front and the back are asym-
metric and the local curvature κf of the front is larger (smaller) than that κb of the back far
away the tip. So, the ﬁnal velocities of the front and the back are consistent, which leads to
stable spiral wave.
In the simulation we ﬁnd that the period diﬀerence between the dense and sparse spirals
and the radius r1 of primary circle satisfy the following approximate relation,
T1 −T0 = 8r1.
(6)
If r1=0, T1 reduces to T0, and it corresponds to dense spiral. Because the velocities of
both the front and the back decrease with ε, T0 and T1 increase with ε. The closer the
parameter ε is to εc, the longer it needs to evolve from the initial condition to sparse spiral.
This attributes to the critical slowing down near the bifurcation point εc.
In the present case, the system is symmetric and the symmetry breakdown of the front
and the back originates from a subcritical bifurcation, which diﬀers from that in Ref. 21.
They obtained the dense and sparse spirals in symmetric and asymmetric bistable systems,
respectively, in the limit of ε/δ≪1. In that case, the symmetry breakdown originates from
a saddle-node bifurcation induced by a constant in the model.
Figure 6 (a) shows the dependence of rotation frequency of dense and sparse spirals on
the parameter ε. The ﬁlled square (cycle) denotes dense (sparse) spiral. It can be seen
that the rotation frequency of dense (sparse) spiral varies nonlinearly, nonmonotonously
(monotonously) with respect to ε. The frequency of sparse spiral disappears for ε<0.33, and
is always smaller than that of dense spiral, which is due to the rigid rotation.
C.
Meandering of sparse spiral induced by boundary eﬀects
Figure 6 (b) shows the dependence of average primary frequency ω1 on the parameter ε
under diﬀerent domain sizes. It can be seen that for small ε these curves are superposition.
But for large ε they begin to diverge. The onset of diverge increases with domain sizes
9

0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.32
0.36
0.40
0.44
0.05
0.10
0.15
(a)
 
 
 Dense spiral
 Sparse spiral
(b)
 
 
 51.2
 64
 80
 120
 160
FIG. 6: Dependence of rotation frequency of spirals on the parameter ε. In (a) the ﬁlled square
(cycle) denotes dense (sparse) spiral. Domain size: 64×64 s.u. (b) shows the rotation frequencies
of sparse spirals under diﬀerent domain sizes. The curves for small domain sizes diverge when ε is
larger than about 0.38.
and indicates the startpoint of meandering spiral. The rotation frequency increases with
decreasing domain sizes at larger ε. This phenomenon agrees well with the experimental
observation in Ref. 28. The radius r1 of primary circle decreases with domain sizes for
larger ε as shown in Fig. 2, which attribute to the interaction between the spiral tip and the
boundary. In addition, near the onset, the sparse spiral begins to meander and the radius r2
of the secondary cycle tends to be inﬁnite. But due to the boundary eﬀects, r2 is limited to a
distance away from the boundary about 10 s.u.. With increasing ε, r2 decreases dramatically
and then tends to be zero at certain bifurcation point. Near this point the radius r2 scales
approximately as the square-root of the distance from this bifurcation point. This means
that the boundary-induced meandering originates from a supercritical bifurcation.
From the simulation for diﬀerent domain sizes and ε we can give an experiential condition
for meandering of sparse spirals,
L/λ ∈(0.5, 0.7),
(7)
where L is the domain size and λ is the wavelength of sparse spiral. It demonstrates that
10

meandering of spiral occurs when the wavelength of spiral reaches at least twice of the
domain size.
We only observed the meandering of sparse spirals with outward petals even by changing
the chiralities of spirals. No meandering spiral with inward petal is found in simulations.
The observed characteristics of meandering spirals diﬀer greatly from that observed in ex-
citable media in Refs. 29, 30 in which hypocycloidlike orbit transits into epibycloidlike orbit
as changing a control parameter continuously. That meandering with both outward and in-
ward petals originates from a pair of secondary Hopf bifurcations. But in the present work,
from the description of Fig. 3, it can be seen that the obtained meandering of sparse spiral
originates from boundary eﬀect rather than regular meandering instability. By investigat-
ing the linear stability analysis of spirals, B¨ar and co-workers31 observed meandering-Hopf
bifurcation (regular meandering which contains a couple of Hopf bifurcations as Barkley re-
ported) and boundary-Hopf bifurcation (boundary-induced Hopf bifurcation which contains
only one Hopf bifurcation point). The boundary-Hopf bifurcation has two characteristics:
1) it occurs only when the domain size is smaller than a critical value; 2) it contains only
one bifurcation point. Our results, as shown in Fig. 1-3, satisfy the two conditions. So,
the meandering spirals in our case result from boundary-induced Hopf bifurcation. If there
exists regular meandering for bistable spiral, it is impossible to make a simulation because
it tends to be uniform state when ε is large enough.
IV.
CONCLUSION AND REMARKS
We have studied the transformation between dense and sparse spirals based on a bistable
FitzHugh-Nagumo model and investigated a novel meandering of sparse spiral with only
outward petals.
The dense spiral and the sparse spiral can transform each other via a
subcritical bifurcation which diﬀers from that in excitable media.19,27 The dense spiral can
transit into either PPSS or NPSS. We can ﬁnd a way to turn a PPSS into dense spiral then
into NPSS by decreasing ε and then increasing it again, which provides a simple method
to adjusting the duration of a cardiac action potential to prevent the atrial ﬁbrillation.6 By
using diﬀerent domain sizes we have studied the meandering of sparse spiral and given an
experiential condition for spiral meandering induced by the boundary eﬀects L/λ∈(0.5, 0.7).
The observed meandering of sparse spiral with only outward petal originates from a Hopf
11

bifurcation induced by the boundary eﬀects.
Although the present FitzHugh-Nagumo model isn’t a realistic model describing chemical
reaction, it has successfully explained many pattern formations in ferrocyanide-iodate-sulﬁte
reactions,21–26,32 such as the spiral, the self-replicating spots, and the labyrinthine pattern
which occur on the left, near, and on the right of the NIB bifurcation point, respectively.
In the present work we studied the transformation between dense and sparse spirals on the
left of this bifurcation point. We hope that our results can be observed in a ferrocyanide-
iodate-sulﬁte reaction.
V.
