arXiv:1004.5326v1  [cond-mat.dis-nn]  29 Apr 2010
Designing neural networks that process mean values of
random variables
Michael J. Barbera,∗, John W. Clarkb
aAIT Austrian Institute of Technology GmbH, Foresight and Policy Development
Department, Vienna, Austria
bDepartment of Physics, Washington University, Saint Louis, MO 63130
Abstract
We introduce a class of neural networks derived from probabilistic models in
the form of Bayesian networks. By imposing additional assumptions about
the nature of the probabilistic models represented in the networks, we derive
neural networks with standard dynamics that require no training to deter-
mine the synaptic weights, that perform accurate calculation of the mean
values of the random variables, that can pool multiple sources of evidence,
and that deal cleanly and consistently with inconsistent or contradictory ev-
idence. The presented neural networks capture many properties of Bayesian
networks, providing distributed versions of probabilistic models.
Keywords:
Neural networks, probabilistic models, Bayesian networks,
Bayesian inference, neural information processing, population coding
1. Introduction
Artiﬁcial neural networks are noted for their ability to learn functional
relationships from observed data. Unfortunately, a trained neural network
is typically a black box, so that it can be quite diﬃcult to determine what
function is actually represented by the network. In numerous cases, neural
networks have been related to probabilistic models, with either the trained
network retrospectively given a probabilitic interpretation or the training
process itself explicitly based on a probabilistic strategy. Alternatively, a con-
structive approach can be taken to exploring representation of probabilistic
∗Corresponding author

Preprint submitted to arXiv
October 26, 2018

models in neural networks, encoding pre-speciﬁed probabilistic models into
network weights. A key challenge in this alternate approach is to produce
reasonable neural networks, allowing a suitably broad class of probabilistic
models to be encoded into neural networks with recognizable architectures
and dynamics. Towards this end, in this paper we formulate and characterize
an encoding method that handles a restricted class of probabilistic models
and allows calculation, without training, of neural networks that accurately
process the mean values of the random variables with the usual neural acti-
vation of a weighted sum of the neural inputs transformed with a nonlinear
activation function.
Probabilistic formulations of neural information processing have been ex-
plored along a number of avenues. One of the earliest such analyses showed
that the original Hopﬁeld neural network implements, in eﬀect, Bayesian
inference on analog quantities in terms of probability densities [1]. Zemel
et al. [2] have investigated population coding of probability distributions,
but with diﬀerent representations and dynamics than those we consider in
this paper. Several extensions of this representation scheme have been devel-
oped [3, 4, 5] that feature information propagation between interacting neural
populations. Additionally, several “stochastic machines” [6] have been for-
mulated, including Boltzmann machines [7], sigmoid belief networks [8], and
Helmholtz machines [9]. Stochastic machines are built of stochastic neurons
that occupy one of two possible states in a probabilistic manner. Learning
rules for stochastic machines enable such systems to model the underlying
probability distribution of a given data set.
Additionally, the connection between neural networks and probabilistic
models represented speciﬁcally as Bayesian networks [10, 11] has been ex-
plored along two main lines. In one approach, the neural network architec-
ture and activation dynamics are speciﬁed, with a learning rule used that at-
tempts to capture the appropriate Bayesian network in the synaptic weights
based on observed patterns [8, 12].
In a second approach, a prespeciﬁed
Bayesian network is transformed into a neural network using an encoding
process [13, 14]. While speciﬁc Bayesian networks are readily given in the
latter approach, the neural architecture and dynamics arise from the encod-
ing and need not match existing deﬁnitions. In particular, instead of the
usual weighted sum of neural activation values passed through a nonlinear
activation function, the encoding process can produce neural networks de-
pending on multiplicative interactions between neural activities.
In this work, we further explore the latter, encoding-based approach. By
2

imposing additional, strong assumptions about the originating Bayesian net-
work, we develop neural networks processing mean values of analog variables,
where all weights are calculated and no learning process is needed. The ran-
dom variables are assumed to be normally distributed, which results in only
the mean values being accurately encoded into the neural network. The re-
sulting dynamics are of the usual form for neural networks, i.e., a weighted
sum of the neural inputs transformed with a nonlinear activation function.
We begin with a brief summary of the key relevant properties of Bayesian
networks in Section 2. We describe a procedure for generating and evaluating
the neural networks in Section 3, and apply the procedure to several examples
in Section 4.
2. Bayesian Networks
Bayesian networks [10, 11] are directed acyclic graphs that represent prob-
abilistic models (Fig. 1). Each node represents a random variable, and the
arcs signify the presence of dependence between the linked variables. The
strengths of these inﬂuences are deﬁned using conditional probabilities. We
additionally take the direction of a particular link to indicate the direction
of causality (or, more simply, relevance), with an arc pointing from cause to
eﬀect; in this form, the Bayesian network is also called a causal network.
Multiple sources of evidence about the random variables are conveniently
handled using Bayesian networks.
The belief, or degree of conﬁdence, in
particular values of the random variables is determined as the likelihood of the
value given evidentiary support provided to the network. There are two types
of support that arise from the evidence: predictive support, which propagates
from cause to eﬀect along the direction of the arc, and retrospective support,
which propagates from eﬀect to cause, opposite to the direction of the arc.
Bayesian networks have two properties that we will ﬁnd very useful, both
of which stem from the dependence relations shown by the graph structure.
First, the value of a node X is not dependent upon all of the other graph
nodes. Rather, it depends only on a subset of the nodes, called a Markov
blanket of X, that separates node X from all the other nodes in the graph.
The Markov blanket of interest to us is readily determined from the graph
structure. It is comprised of the union of the direct parents of X, the direct
successors of X, and all direct parents of the direct successors of X. Second,
3

x1
x2
x3
x4
x5
Figure 1: A Bayesian network. Evidence about any of the random variables inﬂuences the
likelihood of the remaining random variables. In a straightforward terminology, the node
at the tail of an arrow is a parent of the child node at the head of the arrow, e.g. X4 is
a parent of X5 and a child of both X2 and X3. From the structure of the graph, we can
see the conditional independence relations in the probabilistic model. For example, X5 is
independent of X1 and X2 given X3 and X4.
the joint probability over the random variables is decomposable as
P(x1, x2, . . . , xn) =
n
Y
µ=1
P(xµ |Pa(xµ)) ,
(1)
where Pa(xµ) denotes the (possibly empty) set of direct-parent nodes of Xµ.
This decomposition comes about from repeated application of Bayes’ rule
and from the structure of the graph.
3. Neural Network Model
We will develop neural networks from the set of marginal distributions
{ρ(xµ; t)} so as to best match a desired probabilistic model ρ(x1, x2, . . . , xD)
over the set of random variables, which are organized as a Bayesian network.
One or more of the variables xµ must be speciﬁed as evidence in the Bayesian
network. To facilitate the development of general update rules, we do not
distinguish between evidence and non-evidence nodes in our notation.
Our general approach will be to minimize the diﬀerence between a prob-
abilistic model ρ(x1, x2, . . . , xD) and an estimate of the probabilistic model
ˆρ(x1, x2, . . . , xD). For the estimate, we utilize
ˆρ(x1, x2, . . . , xD) =
Y
α
ρ(xα; t) .
(2)
4

This is a so-called naive estimate, wherein the random variables are assumed
to be independent.
We will place further constraints on the probabilistic
model and representation to produce neural networks with the desired dy-
namics.
The ﬁrst assumption we make is that the populations of neurons only need
to accurately encode the mean values of the random variables, rather than
the complete densities. We take the ﬁring rates of the neurons representing
a given random variable Xα to be functions of the mean value ¯xα(t)
aα
i (t) = g (Aα
i ¯xα(t) + Bα
i ) ,
(3)
where Aα
i and Bα
i are parameters describing the response properties of neuron
i of the population representing random variable Xα. The activation function
g is in general nonlinear; in this work, we take g to be the logistic function,
g (x) =
1
1 + exp (−x) .
(4)
We use a set of neural response function (Fig. 2) similar to ones from work
on population-temporal coding that supported manipulation of mean values
[15, 16]. We can make use of Eq. 3 to directly encode mean values into neural
activation states, providing a means to specify the value of the evidence nodes
in the NBN.
Using Eq. 3, we derive an update rule describing the neuronal dynamics,
obtaining (to ﬁrst order in τ)
aα
i (t + τ) = g

Aα
i ¯xα(t) + τAα
i
d¯xα(t)
dt
+ Bα
i

.
(5)
Thus, if we can determine how ¯xα changes with time, we can directly deter-
mine how the neural activation states change with time.
The mean value ¯xα(t) can be determined from the ﬁring rates as the
expectation value of the random variable Xα with respect to a density ρ(xα; t)
represented in terms of some decoding functions {φα
i (xα)} The density is
recovered using the relation
ρ(xα; t) =
X
i
aα
i φα
i (xα) .
(6)
The decoding functions are constructed so as to minimize the diﬀerence be-
tween the assumed and reconstructed densities (discussed in detail in [17]).
5

0
0.5
1
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
aj
i(x)
x
Figure 2: The mean values of the random variables are encoded into the ﬁring rates
of populations of neurons. A population of twenty neurons with sigmoidal responses is
associated with each random variable. The neuronal responses aα
i are fully determined
by a single input ξ, which we interpret as the mean value of a density. The form of the
neuronal transfer functions can be altered without aﬀecting the general result presented
in this work.
6

With representations as given in Eq. 6, we have
¯xα(t) =
Z
xαρ (xα; t) dxα
=
X
i
aα
i (t)¯xα
i ,
(7)
where we have deﬁned
¯xα
i =
Z
xαφα
i (xα) dxµ .
(8)
Although we used the decoding functions φα
i (xα) to calculate the parameters
¯xα
i , they can in practice be found directly so that the relations in Eqs. 3 and 7
are mutually consistent.
We take the densities ρ(xα; t) to be normally distributed with the form
ρ(xα; t) ≡ρ(xα; ¯xα(t)) = N(xα; ¯xα(t), σ2
xα). Intuitively, we might expect that
the variance σ2
xα should be small so that the mean value is coded precisely,
but we will see that the variances have no signiﬁcance in the resulting neural
networks.
The second assumption we make is that interactions between the nodes
are linear:
xβ =
X
α
Kβαxα .
(9)
Utilizing the causality relations given by the Bayesian network, we require
that Kβα ̸= 0 only if Xβ is a child node of Xα in the network graph. To
represent the linear interactions as a probabilistic model, we take the nor-
mal distributions ρ(xβ | Pa(xβ)) = N(xβ; P
α Kβαxα, σ2
β) for the conditional
probabilities.
For nodes in the Bayesian network which have no parents, the conditional
probability ρ(xβ | Pa(xβ)) is just the prior probability distribution ρ(xβ).
We utilize the same rule to deﬁne the prior probabilities as to deﬁne the
conditional probabilities. For parentless nodes, the prior is thus normally
distributed with zero mean, ρ(xβ) = N(xβ; 0, σ2
β).
We use the relative entropy [18] as a measure of the “distance” between
the joint distribution describing the probabilistic model ρ(x1, x2, . . . , xD) and
the density estimated from the neural network ˆρ(x1, x2, . . . , xD). Thus, we
minimize
E = −
Z
ˆρ(x1, x2, . . . , xD) log
ρ(x1, x2, . . . , xD)
ˆρ(x1, x2, . . . , xD)

dx1dx2 · · · dxD
(10)
7

with respect to the mean values ¯xα. By making use of the gradient descent
prescription
d¯xγ
dt = −η ∂E
∂¯xγ
(11)
and the decomposition property for Bayesian networks given by Eq. 1, we
obtain the update rule for the mean values,
d¯xγ
dt = η
σ2
γ
 X
β
Kγβ¯xβ −¯xγ
!
−η
X
β
Kβγ
σ2
β
 X
α
Kβα¯xα −¯xβ
!
.
(12)
Because the coupling parameters Kαβ are nonzero only when Xα is a parent
of Xβ, generally only a subset of the mean values contributes to updating
¯xγ in Eq. 12. In terms of the Bayesian network graph structure, the only
contributing values come from the parents of Xγ, the children of Xγ, and
the parents of the children of Xγ; this is identical to the Markov blanket
discussed in Section 2.
The update rule for the neural activities is obtained by combining Eqs. 5,
7 and 12, resulting in
aγ
i (t + τ) = g
 X
j
Sγ
ijaγ
j (t) + Bγ
i + ητhγ
i (t)
!
.
(13)
The quantity P
j Sγ
ijaγ
j (t)+Bγ
i serves to stabilize the activities of the neurons
representing ρ(xγ), while
hγ
i (t) =
X
j
T γ
ijaγ
j (t) +
X
β
X
j

Uγβ
ij + V βγ
ij

aβ
j (t) +
X
α,β
X
j
W γβα
ji
aα
j (t) (14)
drives changes in aγ
i (t) based on the densities represented by other nodes of
the Bayesian network. The synaptic weights of the neural network are
Sγ
ij = Aγ
i ¯xγ
j ,
(15)
T γ
ij = −Aγ
i
1
σ2γ
¯xγ
j ,
(16)
Uγβ
ij = Aγ
i
1
σ2
γ
Kγβ¯xγ
j ,
(17)
V βγ
ij
= −Aγ
i
1
σ2
β
Kβγ¯xγ
j ,
(18)
W γβα
ji
= Aγ
i
1
σ2γ
KγβKβα¯xγ
j
(19)
8

The foregoing provides an algorithm for generating and evaluating neural
networks that process mean values of random variables. To summarize,
1. Establish independence relations between model variables. This may
be accomplished by using a graph to organize the variables.
2. Specify the Kαβ to quantify the relations between the variables.
3. Assign network inputs by encoding desired values into neural activities
using Eq. 3.
4. Update other neural activities using the update rule in Eq. 13 and the
supporting deﬁnitions in Eqs. 14 to 19.
5. Extract the expectation values of the variables from the neural activi-
ties using Eq. 7.
4. Examples
As a ﬁrst example, we apply the algorithm to the Bayesian network shown
in Fig. 1, with ﬁring rate proﬁles as shown in Fig. 2. Specifying x1 = 1/2 and
x2 = −1/2 as evidence, we ﬁnd an excellent match between the mean values
calculated by the neural network and the directly calculated values for the
remaining nodes (Table 1).
We next focus on some simpler Bayesian networks to highlight certain
properties of the resulting neural networks (which will again utilize the ﬁr-
ing rate proﬁles shown in Fig. 2). In Fig. 3, we present two Bayesian net-
works that relate three random variables in diﬀerent ways. The connection
strengths are all taken to be unity in each graph, so that K21 = K23 = K12 =
K13 = 1.
Table 1: The mean values decoded from the neural network closely match the values
directly calculated from the linear relations. The coeﬃcients for the linear combinations
were randomly selected, with values K31 = −0.2163, K32 = −0.8328, K42 = 0.0627,
K43 = 0.1438, K53 = −0.5732, and K54 = 0.5955.
Node
Direct Calculation
Neural Network
X1
0.5000
0.5000
X2
-0.5000
-0.5000
X3
0.3083
0.3084
X4
0.0130
0.0128
X5
-0.1690
-0.1689
9

x2
x1
x3
(a)
x2
x1
x3
(b)
Figure 3: Simpler Bayesian networks. Although the underlying undirected graph structure
is identical for these two networks, the direction of the causality relationships between the
variables are reversed. The neural networks arising from the Bayesian networks thus have
diﬀerent properties.
With the connection strengths so chosen, the two Bayesian networks have
straightforward interpretations. For the graph shown in Fig. 3(a), X2 rep-
resents the sum of X1 and X3, while, for the graph shown in Fig. 3(b), X2
provides a value which is duplicated in X1 and X3.
The diﬀerent graph
structures yield diﬀerent neural networks; in particular, nodes X1 and X3
have direct synaptic connections in the neural network based on the graph
in Fig. 3(a), but no such direct weights exist in a second network based on
Fig. 3(b). Thus, specifying x1 = −1/4 and x2 = 1/4 for the ﬁrst network
produces the expected result ¯x3 = −0.5000, but specifying x2 = 1/4 in the
second network produces ¯x3 = 0.2500 regardless of the value (if any) assigned
to x1.
To further illustrate the neural network properties, we use the graph
shown in Fig. 3(b) to process inconsistent evidence. Nodes X1 and X3 should
copy the value in node X2, but we can specify any values we like as network
inputs. For example, when we assign x1 = −1/4 and x3 = 1/2, the neu-
ral network yields ¯x2 = 0.1250 for the remaining value. This is a typical
and reasonable result, matching the least-squares solution to the inconsis-
tent problem.
5. Conclusion
We have introduced a class of neural networks that consistently mix mul-
tiple sources of evidence. The networks are based on probabilistic models,
represented in the graphical form of Bayesian networks, and function based
10

on traditional neural network dynamics (i.e., a weighted sum of neural activa-
tion values passed through a nonlinear activation function). We constructed
the networks by restricting the represented probabilistic models by introduc-
ing two auxiliary assumptions.
First, we assumed that only the mean values of the random variables need
to be accurately represented, with higher order moments of the distribution
being unimportant. We introduced neural representations of relevant proba-
bility density functions consistent with this assumption. Second, we assumed
that the random variables of the probabilistic model are linearly related to
one another, and chose appropriate conditional probabilities to implement
these linear relationships.
Using the representations suggested by our auxiliary assumptions, we
derived a set of update rules by minimizing the relative entropy of an assumed
density with respect to the density decoded from the neural network. In a
straightforward fashion, the optimization procedure yields neural weights and
dynamics that implement speciﬁed probabilistic relations, without the need
for a training process.
The neural networks investigated in this work captures many of the prop-
erties of both Bayesian networks and traditional neural network models. In
particular, multiple sources of evidence are consistently pooled based on local
update rules, providing a distributed version of a probabilistic model.
Acknowledments
This work was supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation, by
the Portuguese Funda¸c˜ao para a Ciˆencia e a Technologia (FCT) under Bolsa
SFRH/BPD/9417/2002, and by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF) under
project P21450. JWC also acknowledges support received from the Funda¸c˜ao
Luso-Americana para o Desenvolvimento (FLAD) and from the FCT for
his participation in Madeira Math Encounters XXIII at the University of
Madiera, where portions of the work were conducted.
