Towards Energy Efﬁcient Federated Learning over
5G+ Mobile Devices
Dian Shi, Liang Li, Rui Chen, Pavana Prakash, Miao Pan, and Yuguang Fang
Abstract—The continuous convergence of machine learning
algorithms, 5G and beyond (5G+) wireless communications,
and artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) hardware implementation hastens
the birth of federated learning (FL) over 5G+ mobile devices,
which pushes AI functions to mobile devices and initiates a
new era of on-device AI applications. Despite the remarkable
progress made in FL, huge energy consumption is one of the
most signiﬁcant obstacles restricting the development of FL over
battery-constrained 5G+ mobile devices. To address this issue,
in this paper, we investigate how to develop energy efﬁcient
FL over 5G+ mobile devices by making a trade-off between
energy consumption for “working” (i.e., local computing) and
that for “talking” (i.e., wireless communications) in order to
boost the overall energy efﬁciency. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst examine
energy consumption models for graphics processing unit (GPU)
computation and wireless transmissions. Then, we overview
the state of the art of integrating FL procedure with energy-
efﬁcient learning techniques (e.g., gradient sparsiﬁcation, weight
quantization, pruning, etc.). Finally, we present several potential
future research directions for FL over 5G+ mobile devices from
the perspective of energy efﬁciency.
INTRODUCTION
Machine learning (ML), particularly deep learning (DL), is
one of the most disruptive technologies the world has wit-
nessed in the last few years. Unfortunately, cloud-centric ML
generates tremendous trafﬁc and also causes serious privacy
concerns, which is not suitable for many resource-constrained
applications. In order to scale and move beyond the cloud-
centric ML, Google has introduced federated learning (FL),
the currently popular distributed machine learning paradigm,
which aims to enable mobile devices to collaboratively learn a
joint global ML model without sharing their privacy sensitive
raw data [1]. With FL, distributed data stakeholders (e.g.,
mobile devices) only need to periodically upload their updated
local models to the aggregation server for global updates,
instead of uploading their potentially private raw data, thus
signiﬁcantly lowering the risk of privacy leakage. However,
stakeholders in many IoT applications, like smart devices, are
resource constrained in terms of spectrum, energy, computing
and storage, which makes FL for such on-device applica-
tions highly challenging. Therefore, another recent surging
technology, 5G and beyond (5G+) [2], can further facilitate
the implementation of FL over mobile devices. First, due
to the advance of hardware design, 5G+ mobile devices
are usually armed with ever-increasingly high-performance
computation units, such as the central processing units (CPUs)
Dian Shi, Rui Chen, Pavana Prakash, and Miao Pan are with University of
Houston; Liang Li is with Xidian University; Yuguang Fang is with University
of Florida.
and graphics processing units (GPUs), which enable them
to host computation-intensive learning tasks. Besides, 5G
standard has also embraced the computing capability, such
as multi-access edge computing (MEC), paving the way
for performing computing for edge intelligence, and hence
building an effective wireless network architecture to support
viable FL. Moreover, 5G+ wireless transmissions are featured
by a very high data rate and ultra-low latency, which can be
leveraged to tackle the communication bottleneck issue for
local model updates during training. Such a combination of
5G+ and FL prompts tremendous successful applications over
5G mobile devices, including keyboard prediction [3], cardiac
event prediction [4], ﬁnancial risk management [5], etc.
While deploying FL over 5G+ mobile devices is promising
to have so many interesting applications, FL and 5G+ mobile
devices cannot be easily married for fruitful use without
frictions. Severe challenges are foreseeable, of which energy
consumption is the dominant concern. On the one hand,
executing on-device computing and performing local model
updates are both resource-hungry, inducing a signiﬁcant surge
of energy consumption on mobile devices and hence draining
signiﬁcant battery power. Thus, the ﬁrst mountain we have
to climb is to improve the system energy efﬁciency in order
to prolong the lifetime of mobile devices during training,
where the energy consumption usually comes from both the
local computing and wireless communications. On the other
hand, for FL over 5G+ mobile devices, there will be a trade-
off between computing and communication over resource-
constrained mobile devices. This stems from our observation
on the comparable energy consumption for on-device training
with high-performance processors and wireless transmissions
with advanced communication techniques. For example, to
transmit a ResNet-50 model, a commonly used deep network
for image classiﬁcation, with approximately 100MB param-
eters via 100 Mbps 5G wireless uplinks typically consumes
30J for Industry IoT devices [6]. This is comparable to the
energy consumption for performing a single-step local training
on one GPU (e.g., 30J for NVIDIA Tesla V100 on ImageNet
dataset [7]). Therefore, how to make a trade-off between
computing and communications in order to accommodate
realistic computing environments is another critical issue
when deploying FL over 5G+ mobile devices.
Motivated by the aforementioned challenges, we plan to
investigate the energy-efﬁcient FL over 5G+ mobile devices
in this paper. Our goal is to enable effective and efﬁcient
local training on 5G+ mobile devices while minimizing the
overall energy consumption for FL over 5G+ mobile devices
arXiv:2101.04866v1  [cs.LG]  13 Jan 2021

for both involved communications and computing. To this
end, we ﬁrst give an overview on the FL over 5G+ mobile
devices and discuss the energy consumption models. Then, we
study the local computing and wireless transmission co-design
from the long-term learning perspective, where we make a
trade-off between the two parts simultaneously. In addition,
several advanced techniques, including gradient sparsiﬁcation,
gradient quantization, weight quantization, model pruning,
and dynamic batch sizes, are integrated into the FL training
procedure to further reduce energy for 5G+ mobile devices.
Finally, we conclude this paper with discussions on potential
research directions for energy efﬁcient FL over 5G+ mobile
devices.
BACKGROUNDS AND ENERGY MODELS
FL over 5G+ Mobile Devices
As an emerging decentralized learning paradigm, FL has
taken advantage of the computing resources across massive
participants. Speciﬁcally, all participants collaboratively con-
tribute to one global learning task in a distributed manner with
continuous interactions for model parameter updates. With
FL over 5G+ mobile devices, all 5G+ mobile devices (e.g.,
smartphones, laptops, automatic vehicles, etc.) can serve as
participants, and a server such as gNodeB acts as the aggrega-
tor. In particular, a 5G server ﬁrst broadcasts a current global
model to the participating 5G+ mobile devices in FL. After
receiving the global model, a 5G+ mobile device conducts
the local on-device training based on the local data and its
computing capability. Second, when a 5G+ mobile device
ﬁnishes its local training in this round, it will upload its local
model updates (i.e., gradients) to the server via wireless links
with 5G+ techniques. Finally, the server does the aggregation
over all the received local gradients to update the global model
and then feeds it back to the participated mobile devices for
the next-round training. The above procedures are repeated
until obtaining a converged global model, which can be
deployed by the 5G+ devices for future utilization. A typical
paradigm of the FL over 5G+ mobile devices, including local
computation and wireless communications parts, is shown in
Fig. 1.
FL over 5G+ mobile devices has become a natural way
to implement the artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) at the edge, like
the keyboard prediction introduced by Google [3]. Such a
combination pushes AI functions to mobile devices, which
provides a ﬂexible and convenient approach to conducting
a learning task, especially for some real-time and lifelong
learning applications. However, deploying FL over 5G+ mo-
bile devices raises tremendous challenges and difﬁculties, and
energy consumption is one of the most signiﬁcant issues.
Unlike other central servers with wired connections, mobile
devices have limited energy resources due to the limited
battery power. Besides, the energy consumption of wireless
transmissions is not encountered in learning scenarios with
wired servers. Both make it extremely difﬁcult for 5G+ mobile
devices to handle the energy-hungry training tasks. In light of
Mobile Edge Devices
. . .
Local Model Updates
Global Model Broadcasting
5G and Beyond
5G
5G Communications
Local Computing
Fig. 1.
The illustration of the FL over 5G+ mobile devices.
this, it is worthwhile to investigate the FL’s energy model over
5G+ mobile devices to deal with energy-saving issue.
Communication and Computation Energy Models
With FL, all 5G+ mobile devices contribute to one uniﬁed
global model by continuously transferring the local model
updates with the centralized aggregator. In this process, the
energy consumption of the 5G+ mobile devices mainly comes
from the wireless transmissions of the model updates and the
local computation executed on them. Hence, brief descriptions
of the communication energy model and the computation
energy model are given as follows.
Communication: All the participating 5G+ mobile devices
transmit their computed local model updates to the central
aggregator through the wireless transmissions, which cor-
responds to the communication energy consumption. Note
that conducting an FL task usually takes several minutes
due to the heavy computational load of training. In this
situation, the channel condition may not remain the same
all the time and may suffer from ﬂuctuations. Therefore,
one possible way to model the transmission rate for each
device throughout the entire training process is to do it in
an expected manner, where the expectation is taken over the
channel variations. Besides, according to the Shannon–Hartley
theorem, both the bandwidth and the transmission power also
impact the transmission rate, and the power of additive white
Gaussian noise (AWGN) needs to be considered as well.
Accordingly, the overall energy consumed by each device
for wireless transmissions during the training process can be
formulated as the product of the required number of global
communication rounds and the energy consumption in a single
round. Here, the one-round energy consumption is related to
the transmission power, the transmission rate, and the model
size.
According to the characteristics of the energy model men-
tioned above, two possible ways can be adopted to save
the energy consumption on the communication part in the
entire training process, namely, decreasing the required rounds
of global communications and reducing the communication

workloads per round. Given this observation, several ap-
proaches can be implemented to save the communication
overhead. On the one hand, global synchronizations can be
taken after several local computing iterations to decrease
the communication frequency, that is, the federated aver-
age [1]. Similarly, the number of required global communi-
cation rounds can also be reduced by gradually increasing
the batch size throughout the training. On the other hand,
model compression technologies, e.g., model sparsiﬁcation
and quantization, can greatly help reduce the size of the
local model to be transmitted, thus saving the communication
energy in each round.
Computing: With the ever-increasing popularity of smart
devices equipped with high-performance GPUs, 5G+ mobile
devices can undertake heavy computations even for deep
learning tasks. However, due to the powerful computational
capability and the massively parallel architecture of the GPU,
the computational energy consumption has been a signiﬁcant
burden for the learning scenarios, especially for training
tasks implemented on the mobile devices with limited battery
power. Thus, more research efforts are needed to investigate
the computing energy model and the corresponding com-
puting energy-saving strategies. Here, we assume that the
5G+ mobile devices are equipped with GPUs, which are
widely assumed in modern learning training. Speciﬁcally, the
GPU computation architecture involves the memory modules
referring to data fetching and the core modules referring to
the data calculation. Under this architecture, the voltage and
the frequency of the corresponding modules can be controlled
independently.
The energy consumption for feeding a mini-batch of data
in one local iteration can be calculated as the product of the
execution time and the runtime power. Here, the execution
time is determined by the device-dependent parameters, like
the memory frequency and the core frequency, and the task
speciﬁc information, such as the number of cycles for data
fetching and calculation [8]. Similarly, the runtime power
is also affected by device-dependent parameters, including
the frequency and the voltage, and coefﬁcients related to the
speciﬁc learning tasks. Hence, the total computation energy
consumption can be computed as the product of energy
consumption for one local iteration and the total number
of iterations. Currently, model compression techniques, such
as pruning and weight quantization, together with the cor-
responding hardware co-design, can alleviate the burden of
computing energy consumption in one local iteration because
the needed number of cycles for data fetching and calculation
is decreased. The total number of local iterations will increase
mildly due to the falling of the model precision in each local
iteration, but in all, the total computational energy will be
saved.
ENERGY-EFFICIENT FL VIA COMMUNICATION AND
COMPUTING CO-DESIGN
As illustrated in the previous section, the energy consump-
tion of FL over 5G+ mobile devices mainly comes from
0.82
-0.13
-0.21
0.64
5G
-0.32
0.18
-0.11
0.21
-0.32
0
0
0.21
5G
-0.3
0.2
-0.1
0.2
5G
-0.32
0.18
-0.11
0.21
5G
0.8
-0.1
-0.2
0.6
5G
0.82
-0.21
0.64
5G
Gradient Sparsification
Gradient Quantization
Model Pruning
Dynamic Batch Sizes
Weight Quantization
Uploaded Local Gradient
Downloaded Global Model
Fig. 2. Illustrative scenarios for energy-efﬁcient FL over 5G+ mobile devices.
two parts: on-device local computing and wireless commu-
nications for model updates. Thus, in this section, we focus
on how to integrate various technologies (e.g., gradient spar-
siﬁcation, gradient quantization, weight quantization, model
pruning, etc.) and develop corresponding communication and
computing co-design to reduce overall energy consumption for
FL over 5G+ mobile devices. In this section, we will survey
some recent developments focusing on the communication
and computing energy consumption co-design, which are
illustrated in Fig. 2.
Gradient Sparsiﬁcation to Reduce Communication Energy
FL communication energy consumption can be reduced
by integrating the training algorithm with two state-of-the-art
communication compression strategies, namely, local compu-
tations and gradient sparsiﬁcation. The former allows more
local computations performed on the 5G+ mobile device
between every two global model updates, thereby reducing
the total number of communication rounds. The latter lets
participants upload only a fraction of gradients with signiﬁcant
magnitudes, thereby reducing the communication payload in
each round. Besides, error compensation is applied at each
participant after every model update to accelerate the global
convergence by accumulating the error that arises from only
uploading sparse approximations of the gradient updates,
ensuring all gradient information gets eventually aggregated.
The convergence results for our FL algorithm indicate that,
from the learning perspective, the gradient sparsity magnitudes
of all the participants jointly make an impact on global
convergence and communication complexity. Given a target
model accuracy, a lower sparsity results in a larger bound of
communication rounds. Besides, aggressively increasing local
iterations can also impair the learning efﬁciency since more
communications may be involved. In a realistic edge com-
puting environment, these two types of compression factors
implicitly determine the energy consumption for participat-
ing 5G+ mobile devices by affecting the payload required
for transmissions and the workload required for processing,
respectively. Thus, they are needed to be well balanced for
each participant to accommodate the speciﬁc environment.
This can be achieved by formulating a compression control
problem using the derived convergence bound from the long-

100
102
104
106
Energy consumption (J)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Test error
FedAvg
UnifiedSpar
FlexibleSpar
(a) Test error vs. energy consumption.
0
50
100
150
200
250
Epoch
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Training accuracy
FedAvg
UnifiedSpar
FlexibleSpar
(b) Training accuracy vs. epoch.
Fig. 3.
Performance evaluation for the FL with gradient sparsiﬁcation.
term learning perspective
[9], with the goal for optimizing
the overall energy efﬁciency for FL on 5G+ mobile devices
over wireless networks. As shown in Fig. 3(a), the ﬂexible
sparsiﬁcation based FL method (“FlexibleSpar”), which con-
siders the heterogeneity of participating 5G+ mobile devices
and provides the ﬂexible sparsiﬁcation strategies, consume
less energy than the other methods (FedAvg; “UniﬁedSpar”:
the uniﬁed sparsity approach) to reach a given target accu-
racy. Furthermore, Fig. 3(b) shows the convergence rate in
terms of training epochs, which indicates that “FlexibleSpar”
exhibits very similar behavior with “UniﬁedSpar” in terms of
convergence rate and ﬁnal accuracy, both of which slightly
underperform the baseline approach, i.e., FedAvg [1].
Gradient Quantization to Reduce Communication Energy
Similar to the gradient sparsiﬁcation technique, another
efﬁcient compression method to reduce the communication
energy consumption is gradient quantization. After completing
the local training in one round, the computed gradients should
be uploaded to the aggregator for the global updates. With
gradient quantization, instead of uploading all raw gradients,
we can also quantify the computed local gradients with low
precision, i.e., a small number of bits, thus reducing the
communication load per round. In this way, a high gradient
quantization level corresponds to a low communication energy
consumption per round. In contrast, the required global rounds
increase due to the precision reduction, thus increasing the
total computing energy. Therefore, the gradient quantization
level needs to be controlled to make a trade-off between
the communication and computing for the overall energy
efﬁciency. It should be noted that local updates (i.e., gradients)
refer to the communication part, and thus gradient quanti-
zation can reduce the communication energy consumption.
However, when we download the global model on the device,
the weight quantization is related to the computing part, which
will be discussed in the following subsection.
Weight Quantization to Reduce Computing Energy
Weight quantization is regarded as a promising solution
to decrease the local memory consumption in FL training.
It reduces the model complexity and computing energy con-
sumption via representing the model parameters with small
bit-widths (e.g., 8-bit or 16-bit ﬁxed point numbers) on 5G+
mobile devices. Besides, considering device heterogeneity, the
quantization selections for different participants are varying.
However, the quantization induces information loss during
training. The errors between the quantized and original values
make the FL model converge to a neighborhood of the optimal
solution. Smaller quantization levels (i.e., bit representations)
lead to a higher error and push the FL model further away
from the minima. For synchronous aggregation, given a ﬁxed
number of communication rounds, the accuracy of the FL
model depends on the average quantization errors of all the
participants. In this way, given a model accuracy, the partici-
pants, with limited computing power and poor channel condi-
tions, prefer more aggressive quantization strategies (smaller
bit-widths) to train the local models efﬁciently. In contrast,
others would coordinate with higher precision training for the
model performance.
As a result, one can consider a joint design for ﬂexible
quantization selection and bandwidth allocation to capture the
trade-off between the local computing and communications
and minimize the overall energy consumption for FL training
within allowed deadline [10]. One example of a stochastic
quantization scheme could ﬁrst determine a quantization set
based on different quantization levels, and then map the model
weights to the nearest quantization point with high probability.
The participating devices could determine different quanti-
zation levels depending on their device capabilities and the
targeted model accuracy. Meanwhile, the server allocates the
wireless bandwidth to the participants considering both the
channel conditions and participants’ computing capabilities.
This process terminates when it reaches a certain global
model accuracy level. Fig.4(a) shows the overall energy con-
sumption for the FL training procedure under different learn-
ing mechanisms. For a ﬁxed number of training iterations,
those mechanisms equipped with quantization (“UniﬁedQnt”
and “FWQnt”) consume less energy than “FedAvg” without
quantization. Speciﬁcally, the scheme “FWQnt” considers
the model performance, device heterogeneity and wireless
channel conditions and enhances the energy efﬁciency with x2
- x100 less energy consumption than the other schemes in the

102
104
106
108
Energy Consumption (J)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Training Accuracy
FedAvg
UnifiedQnt
FWQnt
(a) Training accuracy vs. energy consumption.
0
50
100
150
200
Epoch
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Test Error
FedAvg
UnifiedQnt
FWQnt
(b) Test error vs. epoch.
Fig. 4.
Performance evaluation for the FL with weight quantization.
FL training process under the same accuracy level. Moreover,
the convergence rates for the corresponding schemes are also
shown in Fig.4(b), where both quantization based approaches
slightly underperform “FedAvg”.
Model Pruning to Reduce Computing Energy
Another efﬁcient learning technique that can be integrated
into the FL process is model pruning, which can save the
computing energy during training with proper underlying code
design. Generally speaking, model pruning compresses the
model by removing less contributing weights and connections,
while retaining the performance of the original dense models.
This will signiﬁcantly affect the reduction of the computing
energy per iteration required. When utilizing gradual prun-
ing schemes, with the model size gradually reduced during
training, energy consumption due to communications is also
decreased. Besides, reducing the model size also saves the
inference time and energy, enabling the pruning method to be
much more suitable for FL training over 5G+ mobile devices.
Moreover, the pruning can be coupled with the quantization
technique in FL training to address the restrictions in imple-
menting deep neural networks on resource-constrained 5G+
mobile devices. Essentially, quantization requires a smaller
number of bits to represent each pruned connection, thereby
reducing memory, bandwidth and energy consumption. To
enable a communication efﬁcient and mobile device com-
patible FL process, we develop a three-fold compression of
double quantization along with model pruning approach [11].
In particular, the gradients and weights of uplink and downlink
models are appropriately quantiﬁed, and the gradual pruning
of the received model is utilized to reduce the computing and
communication loads. This has a dual advantage of reducing
the communication time and energy, and reducing the memory
bandwidth due to less memory accesses. Therefore, we can
reduce the model redundancy and make the FL process
computation, storage, and communication sufﬁciently efﬁcient
to deploy large-sized deep neural networks over 5G+ mobile
devices.
Other Techniques to Save Energy
The total energy consumption can also be reduced by
capturing the intrinsic training dynamics, such as dynamically
adjusting the batch size [12]. Speciﬁcally, we can interpret
the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) training process as
integrating a stochastic differential equation (SDE) whose
“noise scale” is related to the batch size selection. Small
batch size theoretically corresponds to large-scale random
ﬂuctuations, which can help explore the parameter space to
avoid trapping in local minima at the initial stage in the FL
problem. At later stage, small-scale ﬂuctuations (large batch
size) are more desirable to ﬁne-tune the parameters when a
promising region of parameter space is reached. Therefore,
gradually increasing batch size in the training process with a
well-designed increment strategy can help reduce the commu-
nication rounds in FL training process.
Moreover, gradually increasing batch size also leads to
positive effects on computational energy-saving. Due to the
GPU’s parallelism property, the local computing energy is no
longer proportional to the batch size. Accordingly, the energy
consumption of unit data calculation is relatively small for
large batch training, especially executing on the 5G+ mobile
devices with multiple GPUs. Besides, it has been theoretically
and experimentally demonstrated that both the ﬁxed batch size
approach and the dynamic batch size approach need similar
data epochs. In this case, thanks to the beneﬁt of large batch
training at later stage, the training approach with dynamical
batch sizes is more energy-efﬁcient. Moreover, a batch size
control scheme catering to the GPU computing performances
and wireless communication conditions of mobile devices can
be further developed to balance the computing and communi-
cations, thus achieving energy-efﬁcient FL over 5G+ mobile
devices.
Balancing Communications and Computing to Reduce Overall
Energy Consumption
As aforementioned, the trade-off always exists between
communications and computing. Therefore, it is widely ex-
pected that both computing and communication parts need
to be considered in the energy-efﬁcient FL training process.
When integrating both in the FL training process, the needed
number of global communication rounds is a critical element.
One possible way to approximate the needed global rounds

is to conduct the FL theoretical convergence analysis. After
identifying the speciﬁc dataset and the training model, the
bound of the required number of communications can be
derived based on the required training accuracy under some
mathematical assumptions. Note that some learning settings,
e.g., batch size, local iteration numbers, etc., also impact the
required number of communications. Accordingly, the total
energy consumption corresponding to the required number
of global rounds can be obtained, which exhibits a global
view of the overall energy consumption in the FL training
process. Despite employing the computing or communication
efﬁcient learning techniques, the energy efﬁciency cannot be
signiﬁcantly improved without elaborately controlling the key
training parameters from a global perspective. This requires us
to optimize the training parameters, so that communications
and computing can be well balanced. This is why, in the
above subsections, we ﬁrstly study the efﬁcient communi-
cation (e.g., gradient sparsiﬁcation, gradient quantization and
dynamic batch sizes) or efﬁcient local computing (e.g., weight
quantization and pruning [13]) methods in order to ﬁnd the
effective schemes. We then integrate these efﬁcient methods
with resource allocation strategies to strike a good balance
between communications and computing, thus minimizing the
energy consumption for FL over 5G+ mobile devices.
CHALLENGES AND FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
Although there are a few pioneering research works done
on the energy efﬁciency for FL over 5G+ mobile devices,
the relevant study is still in its infancy and requires more
thorough investigation. In this section, we summarize some
existing challenges and potential future directions.
Energy-Efﬁcient FL over Heterogeneous Mobile Devices
Most of the existing energy-efﬁcient FL algorithms assume
certain homogeneity of mobile devices, while they may be
considerably different in practice. The heterogeneity across
participating devices may lie in local training data, comput-
ing capability, and wireless channel condition, etc., which
require ﬂexible and customizable training strategies for each
participant. Thus, it is expected to develop advanced design
methodology for efﬁcient FL over 5G+ mobile devices across
multi-dimensional heterogeneity. Accordingly, the quantiza-
tion granularity, the pruning strategy, and compression levels
for different participants can vary to accommodate their
realistic environments for energy-saving. For example, the
device with powerful GPUs but poor channel conditions may
choose to compute more and communicate less and vice
versa. In these situations, it is also signiﬁcant to optimize
the personalized compression or pruning strategy, adapting to
the heterogeneous devices’ capability for total energy saving
by balancing communications and computing.
Energy-Efﬁcient FL under Flexible Aggregation
The practical scenarios with heterogeneous data and devices
demand higher requirements on the aggregation strategies.
On the one hand, the updated local models across devices
may differ in size or even structure, which invalidates the
current FL aggregation schemes (e.g., FedAvg [1]) if averag-
ing model parameters directly. Thus, we need to investigate
more powerful and more ﬂexible aggregation schemes for FL
over heterogeneous 5G+ mobile devices, while mitigating the
energy consumption to the same extent as the baseline FL
algorithms. On the other hand, due to the Non-IID (Indepen-
dent and Identically Distributed) data sources and different
precision for local models, each participant may have different
contributions to the global model in terms of accuracy and
convergence. Therefore, from the energy perspective, only a
proportion of the participants need to contribute their models
in each communication round, or the aggregation will be
performed in an asynchronous way, thus reducing more energy
compared with the original inefﬁcient aggregation method.
Overall, ﬂexible and asynchronous aggregations are efﬁcient
methods to further reduce energy consumption, which de-
serves further investigation.
Energy-Efﬁcient FL with Privacy Preservation
One of the inherited features of FL over 5G+ mobile devices
is the privacy preservation of the users’ sensitive raw data.
Unfortunately, the private information can still be inferred
from local updates communicated between user devices and
the aggregation server with some recently developed attack
mechanisms. Therefore, such a distributed learning, which
needs to exchange intermediate model parameters, brings
in a signiﬁcant design challenge for privacy protection. A
common strategy to enhance the privacy and security for
participating users is to introduce perturbations into the FL
training framework, such as adding the noise. Fortunately,
some early research works have already shown that pruning,
quantization, and other energy-efﬁcient methods can introduce
randomness into the FL training process and provide the en-
hanced privacy guarantee, i.e., intrinsic privacy preservation.
Under such conditions, energy-saving strategy and privacy
protections are perfectly combined, where the privacy will be
preserved without additional noisy computation. However, the
related research is still in its initial stages and needs deeper ex-
ploration, especially for the differential privacy preservation,
where the privacy level can be precisely quantiﬁed.
Extensive Applications of Energy-Efﬁcient FL
With the massive growth of personal data with end users
and the rapid popularization of the power-efﬁcient mobile
edge devices, FL over 5G+ mobile devices can be applied to a
large number of applications [14] and can be involved in every
area of daily life. With energy-efﬁcient training strategies,
FL over 5G+ mobile devices is perfectly compatible with
lifelong on-device learning that requires a constant training
process and is battery-driven. For example, it can be applied to
some real-time assisting services like the voice UI, keyboard
prediction, and some low-latency control scenarios such as
gaming and automated guided vehicles [15]. Moreover, along
with the exponential improvement in on-device AI capabili-
ties, more sensing data from smart sensors like the cameras,

microphones, and compass, can be effectively utilized in
Industrial IoT, e-health, ﬁnance, and social networks, etc.
CONCLUSION
This paper has studied the FL over 5G+ mobile devices
to address the issue on energy consumption during the FL
training process. We have investigated how to properly con-
serve energy and allocate resources during FL training. We
start with introduction of wireless communications and on-
GPU computing models. Then, we discuss several energy-
efﬁcient training techniques, including gradient sparsiﬁcation,
gradient quantization, weight quantization, model pruning,
and dynamic batch sizes, to save energy. At the same time,
the resource allocation strategies are adapted to reasonably
manage energy resources by balancing communications and
computing energy consumption. We conduct extensive simula-
tions to demonstrate the efﬁcacy of the techniques mentioned
above for FL over 5G+ mobile devices. Finally, we have pre-
sented some existing design challenges and the corresponding
research directions.
