Deep learning generates custom-made logistic regression
models for explaining how breast cancer subtypes are
classified
Takuma Shibahara1¶, #a, *, Chisa Wada2¶, Yasuho Yamashita1¶, Kazuhiro Fujita2¶,
Masamichi Sato2, Junichi Kuwata1, Atsushi Okamoto2, Yoshimasa Ono3
1 Research and Development Group, Hitachi Limited, Tokyo, Japan
2 Bioinformatics Group, Translational Research Department, Daiichi Sankyo RD
Novare Coporation, Limited, Tokyo, Japan
3 Translational Research Department, Daiichi Sankyo RD Novare Coporation, Limited,
Tokyo, Japan
¶These authors contributed equally to this work.
#a Current Address: Central Research Laboratory, Hitachi Limited, Tokyo, Japan

Abstract
Differentiating the intrinsic subtypes of breast cancer is crucial for deciding the best
treatment strategy. Deep learning can predict the subtypes from genetic information
more accurately than conventional statistical methods, but to date, deep learning has
not been directly utilized to examine which genes are associated with which subtypes.
To clarify the mechanisms embedded in the intrinsic subtypes, we developed an
explainable deep learning model called a point-wise linear (PWL) model that generates
a custom-made logistic regression for each patient. Logistic regression, which is familiar
to both physicians and medical informatics researchers, allows us to analyze the
importance of the feature variables, and the PWL model harnesses these practical
abilities of logistic regression. In this study, we show that analyzing breast cancer
subtypes is clinically beneficial for patients and one of the best ways to validate the
July 20, 2022
1/25
arXiv:2001.06988v2  [cs.LG]  19 Jul 2022

capability of the PWL model. First, we trained the PWL model with RNA-seq data to
predict PAM50 intrinsic subtypes and applied it to the 41/50 genes of PAM50 through
the subtype prediction task. Second, we developed a deep enrichment analysis method
to reveal the relationships between the PAM50 subtypes and the copy numbers of breast
cancer. Our findings showed that the PWL model utilized genes relevant to the cell
cycle-related pathways. These preliminary successes in breast cancer subtype analysis
demonstrate the potential of our analysis strategy to clarify the mechanisms underlying
breast cancer and improve overall clinical outcomes.
Introduction
Seven decades after the birth of the learning machine [1], deep learning has evolved
to the point that it can provide various predictive analyses. As deep learning spreads
into more and more applications, including bioinformatics analysis, there is a growing
need to explain the reasons for its predictions. Many methods that evaluate the
importance of individual features have been devised to make deep learning models more
explainable. These methods can be roughly classified into perturbation-based and
saliency-based. In both types, the importance is determined by how much each feature
contributes to the output. Perturbation-based methods calculate an importance score
based on how the output behaves in relation to a perturbed input [2–4]. In
saliency-based methods, the importance score depends on each feature’s saliency
evaluated by the gradient of the output with respect to the input [5–8].
In the current study, we developed a point-wise linear model (PWL) for innately
explainable deep learning in RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis. Conventional deep
learning models compute new feature vectors with a linear combination that sufficiently
expresses the objective model, while in contrast, the network of the proposed PWL
model derives a weight function for each original feature vector as a function of the
original feature vectors. Specifically, it generates a custom-made linear model (e.g.,
logistic regression) for each sample, and unlike a simple linear model, each linear model
it generates involves the nonlinear interactions between the original features, since the
weight functions depend on the original feature vector. At the same time, the
importance of each feature can be evaluated by its weight function in each linear model.
July 20, 2022
2/25

This property is highly advantageous in medical applications because practitioners can
utilize the know-how of medical data analysis accumulated throughout its long history.
Additionally, when the PWL model is utilized for deep learning that accurately predicts
cancer subtypes, it can potentially access unknown and nonstandard knowledge related
to gene expressions.
Breast cancer is the most frequently found cancer in women and is the type of cancer
most often subjected to genetic analysis. Even so, it is a leading cause of cancer-related
deaths in women. Analyzing breast cancer is clinically beneficial for patients and one of
the best ways to validate the capability of the PWL model. Conventionally, breast
cancer has been classified on the basis of the protein expression of the estrogen receptor
(ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and epidermal growth factor receptor ErbB2/Her2,
and expressions of these receptors have been used as clinicopathological variables for
treatment decisions [9]. Since the early 2000s, high-throughput genomics technologies
have demonstrated that breast cancer has five clinically relevant molecular subtypes
defined by intrinsic gene expression patterns of the cancer [9–13]: Luminal A, Luminal
B, Her2-enriched, basal-like, and normal breast-like cancer. While the subtypes do not
perfectly reflect the clinical features, most breast cancers of the luminal subtypes are
ER/PR-positive, most Her2-enriched ones have amplification of the Her2 gene, and
most basal-like ones are triple negative (ER−/PR−/Her2−). In the original PAM50
study, the classification of the normal breast-like cancer subtype was trained with
normal breast tissue [12]. Therefore, cancer samples classified to the normal-like
subtype are often interpreted as low tumor content samples [12,14].
To evaluate the prediction performance of the PWL model, we prepared a
classification task with RNA-seq values as the feature vectors and the five subtypes
obtained from the PAM50 assay as the target variables. PAM50 was originally
developed as a predictor of the five intrinsic subtypes from the expression pattern of 50
genes determined using a microarray [11]. If the important genes of the PWL model
with RNA-seq values include the PAM50 genes, the PWL model will be semantically
validated. While PAM50 subtyping is helpful for diagnosis and stratified treatment, it
remains unclear which genes contribute to the mechanisms of action and/or mechanisms
of resistance to treatment for each subtype. Copy number aberrations, i.e., deletion or
amplification of large continuous segments of chromosomes, are a common type of
July 20, 2022
3/25

somatic mutation in cancer and can be directly associated with the expression of genes
and the development of cancer [15–18]. Here, we newly developed a deep enrichment
analysis method to investigate whether the characteristics and mechanisms of cancer
were embedded in the PAM50 prediction model trained with the copy numbers. Figure
1 shows the processing pipeline of our deep enrichment analysis method. In the first
step (Fig. 1 (1)), we prepared a deep learning model (PWL) with copy number values
as the feature vectors and the subtypes as the target variables. In the following steps
(Fig. 1 (2) and (3)), we calculated the correlation between the inner vector and the
RNA-seq values to analyze the relationships between RNA-seq values and copy numbers.
If the deep learning model can predict the subtypes of PAM50 derived from the mRNA
expression level, valuable information to dictate the subtypes might be distilled in the
inner vector of the deep learning model. In the final step (Fig. 1 (4)), we enriched
canonical pathways from the highly correlated genes between RNA-seq values and copy
numbers.
A paper overview (and guide for readers) is provided in S1 Fig., where the parts of
the Materials and Methods and Results sections dealing with the breast cancer subtype
analysis are indicated in orange. Readers who want to grasp essential information
rapidly can take a quick look at the sections and subsections indicated by check marks.
Subtypes
Copy number
1D projected vector
Gene ranking
mRNA values
Reallocation vector
RNA-seq values
mRNA values
Deep learning
Dimensionality
reduction
Correlation
Copy
u
be
Copy numbe
Cancer subtypes
Subtypes
from PAM50 assay
Subtypes
1D projection of
projected vec
inner vectors
p ojected
e
Correlated gene set
Gene ranking
Gene ranking
Pathway analysis
Enriched pathways
Gene ranking
Inner vectors
allocation ve
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Fig 1. Processing pipeline of deep enrichment analysis method. Orange boxes are
functions and processes. Blue boxes are input and output data. The deep learning
model (orange box (1)) is a trained deep learning model (PWL) with copy number
values as the feature vectors and subtypes as the target variables. The enrichment
analysis process flow is as follows. (1) The deep learning model outputs the inner
vectors of the hidden layer. (2) The dimensionality reduction function projects the inner
vectors to 1-dimensional (1D) variables. (3) The correlation process extracts the highly
correlated gene set between RNA-seq values and the projected 1D variables. (4) The
pathway analysis enriches canonical pathways from the correlated gene set.
July 20, 2022
4/25

Materials and Methods
Point-wise linear models
To investigate the nonlinear prediction ability and explainability of the PWL model,
we trained a logistic regression model and a self-normalizing neural network (SNN)
model as a state-of-the-art deep learning [19] using a simple dataset (a large circle
containing a smaller circle generated by sklearn.datasets.make circle [20]). Figure 2
shows three architectures of the machine learning models: (a) logistic regression, (b)
deep learning, and (c) PWL. Let x(n) ∈RD represent a feature vector with N denoting
the sample size and R indicating the real number set. First, we define a logistic
regression model (Fig. 2 (a)) as
y(n) = σ(w · x(n)),
(1)
where w ∈RD is a weight vector for x(n), σ is a sigmoid function, and · is the inner
product. y(n) is a probability value such as one expressing the likelihood of tumor
tissues or normal tissues. The weight vector w is bound to the feature vector x(n). We
can determine the importance of each feature variable by analyzing the magnitude of
the elements in w. However, as shown in Fig. 3, since the circle in a circle is not a
linearly separable problem, the logistic regression model cannot classify the two circles.
Next, we define a standard deep learning model like that shown in Fig. 2 (b). A new
feature vector ϕ(x(n)) ∈RD′ is nonlinearly generated from the original feature vector
x(n) through the L-layer neural network (L ≥2). Note that the notation v (u) for
arbitrary vectors v and u indicates that every element of v is a function of the elements
of u. A deep-learning-based nonlinear classification function predicts the probability
y(n) (Fig. 2 (b)) as follows:
y(n) = σ

w′ · ϕ(x(n))

,
(2)
where w′ ∈RD′ is a universal weight vector for ϕ. The magnitude of each w′ element
July 20, 2022
5/25

y(n)
ξ(n) for x(n)
Input  x(n)
y(n)
w’ for φ(n)
Input  x(n)
y(n)
w for x(n)
Input  x(n)
x(n)
w
x(n)
w
η(n)
w’
φ(n)
ξ(n)
x(n)
ξ(n)
Logistic regression
Deep learning
Point-wise linear
b
c
a
Fig 2. Comparison of network architectures. (a) shows a logistic regression model. x(n)
and y(n) indicate a feature vector and a target value ((n) is sample index), respectively.
w is a vector of learning parameters for x(n). (b) shows a fully connected neural
network. ϕ(n) and w′ indicate an inner vector and learning parameters, respectively. (c)
shows a PWL model. The upper block in (c) is a meta-machine generating a learning
parameter ξ(x(n)). The lower block in (c) is a logistic regression model for each feature
vector x(n).
represents the contribution of the corresponding element of ϕ to the prediction, as
shown in Fig. 2 (b). The SNNs correctly classified the blue and orange dots, as shown
in Fig. 3 (c). However, we cannot “explain” the machine’s prediction by w′ because it
is not possible to understand the meanings of ϕ that the machine uses to make its
predictions.
In order to make a deep NN explainable, we investigated a meta-learning approach
to generate a logistic regression model defined (Fig. 2 (c)) as
y(n) = σ

ξ(x(n)) · x(n)
,
(3)
where each element of ξ ∈RD is a function of x(n) that the NN determines. ξ behaves
as the weight vector for the original feature vector x(n). The magnitude of each element
of ξ describes the importance of the corresponding feature variable. We should point
out here that this weight vector is tailored to each sample because ξ depends on x(n).
July 20, 2022
6/25

Feature vector
Deep learning
Logistic regression
Point-wise linear
Reallocated feature
Straightforward
Point-wise weights
b
e
a
c
d
g
f
Fig 3. Comparison of learning ability and explainability. (a) is a large circle (orange
dots) that contains a smaller circle (blue dots) obtained by sklearn.datasets.make circle.
(b) and (c) are the boundaries classified by the logistic regression model and
self-normalizing network (SNN) model, respectively. (d) and (e) are the boundaries
classified by the PWL model in a straightforward manner (Eq. (3)) and by using the
reallocation function (Eq. (4)), respectively. (f) is the boundary classified by the
reallocated feature vectors ρ. (g) is the arctangent of the angle between the horizontal
and vertical elements of the weight vector ξ(n). The weight vector smoothly changes for
each data sample.
We call Eq. (3) a PWL model given by a straightforward method over the sample index
(n). The architecture of the PWL model consists of the two blocks shown in Fig. 2 (c).
Also, we refer to ξ as the point-wise weight. The upper block is a meta-learning
machine that generates logistic regression models, and the lower block shows the logistic
regression models for the inference task. However, the tailored weight vector ξ can
easily lead to poor generalization (i.e., over or underfitting). In this case, the PWL
model (Eq. (3)) tries to learn the labels of all samples because it generates a weight
vector optimized for each sample, which leads to the underfitting shown in Fig. 3 (c).
We came up with a new equation that constructs a point-wise weight ξ without
losing generalization ability, as follows:
ξ(x(n)) ≡w ⊙η(x(n)),
(4)
where the reallocation vector η ∈RD is nonlinearly generated from the original feature
July 20, 2022
7/25

vector x(n) through the L-layer NN (L ≥2). w ∈RD is a universal weight vector that
is independent of x(n), and ⊙is the Hadamard product. In contrast to the model
defined straightforwardly by Eq. (3), the model defined by Eq. (4) accurately predicts
the classification boundary, as shown in Fig. 3 (e). The weight vectors ξ(n) in Eq. (4)
smoothly change for each data sample (Fig. 3 (g)). The reallocation-based PWL model
thus enables generalization. Additionally, we call ρ(x(n)) ≡η(x(n)) ⊙x(n) a reallocated
feature vector in Rd. NNs have the versatile ability to map a linear feature space to a
nonlinear feature space. By utilizing this ability, η(n) reallocates the feature vector x(n)
into the new vector ρ that is linearly separable by a single hyperplane drawn by w. The
mechanism of Eq. (4) is discussed in S1 Appendix.
Datasets
To validate the PWL model, we used the breast cancer TCGA [21] dataset retrieved
by the UCSC public Xena hub [22] for the gene expression RNA-seq dataset (dataset
ID: TCGA.BRCA.sampleMap/HiSeqV2 PANCAN), the copy number alteration
(gene-level) dataset (dataset ID: TCGA.BRCA.sampleMap/Gistic2 CopyNumber
Gistic2 all thresholded.by genes), and the phenotype dataset (dataset ID:
TCGA.BRCA.sampleMap/BRCA clinicalMatrix). RNA-seq values were calculated by
UCSC Xena as follows. Log2(x + 1) values were mean-normalized per-gene across all
TCGA samples (x is RSEM normalized count [23]). In the copy number dataset of
UCSC Xena, GISTIC2 values were discretized to −2, −1, 0, 1, 2 by Broad Firehose. We
used subtypes pre-calculated by PAM50 (Luminal A, Luminal B, basal-like,
Her2-enriched, and normal-like [10]) in the Xena dataset as the target variables of the
prediction model [13]. Table 1 lists the number of samples for each subtype. The
number D (feature dimension) of mRNAs types was 17,837, as we adopted gene
symbols that overlap with both the RNA-seq data and the copy number alteration data.
Table 1. Number of samples for each breast cancer subtype (Total = 810).
Normal-like
Luminal A
Luminal B
Basal-like
Her2-enriched
Number of samples
22
406
185
131
66
July 20, 2022
8/25

Feature importance calculation method
We utilized the PWL model (Eq. (3)) to calculate the importance of each feature
variable, i.e., how much each feature contributes to the model’s prediction. The
point-wise weight vector ξ depends on x(n) and consequently describes each sample’s
own feature importance. Therefore, we came up with a method to derive the feature
importance for a sample group so as to reveal both the group and the macroscopic
property contained in the point-wise weight vector of the group’s samples. This concept
of the feature importance was also used in [24].
First, we calculated the feature importance for each sample from the weight vector
ξ(n) in Eq. (3). Inspired by the Shapley value [25], we introduced a sample-wise
importance score for the k-th feature xk of a sample with index (n) as
s(n)
k
≡ξ(n)
k x(n)
k
−
1
|U(n)|
X
i∈U(n)
h
ξ(i)
k x(i)
k
i
,
(5)
where U(n) is the set of samples whose weights are close to those of sample (n). This
sample-wise importance score expresses the contribution of a sample (n) to raising the
output probability y(n) compared with the average contribution among a sample group
whose members obey similar linear models. In this study, we defined U(n) as follows: a
sample (i) is in the set U(n) if |ξ(i) −ξ(n)|/|ξ(n)| is smaller than 4|σ|/|¯ξ|, where σ and ¯ξ
are vectors whose elements are given as the standard deviation and the mean,
respectively, of the corresponding element of ξ.
Next, we defined group-wise importance scores for each group (e.g., subtype Her2
samples) by using the sample-wise importance score. We implemented voting among the
group, where each sample votes on its top 10 % features as to which sample-wise
importance scores are the highest, i.e., the features that significantly raise each sample’s
output probability. We defined a group-wise importance score v for each feature as the
rate of samples who vote for the feature in the above voting.
Finally, we introduced a relative score to extract the features that characterize a
subtype. We divided the samples into samples of a target subtype and others and then
evaluated the group-wise importance score for each group. We refer to the group-wise
July 20, 2022
9/25

importance score for the target subtype samples group as vtarget and the one for the
others as vothers. vtarget is not necessarily appropriate for extracting the features that
characterize the target subtype because even when vtarget is high for a feature, if vothers
is also high, the feature might be important for all the subtype samples, not just for the
target ones. Therefore, we defined a relative score vrel so as to compute the feature
importance for the subtype samples relative to the one for the others, as
vrel ≡(vtarget)2 −(vothers)2 .
(6)
Since the range of both vtarget and vothers is [0, 1], the range of vrel becomes [−1, 1]. S2
Fig. shows the distribution of vrel in the vothers-vtarget space. If a relative score is large,
we can expect that both the summation and difference of the group-wise importance
scores vtarget and vothers will be large as well. In other words, features with large
relative scores are important to a certain degree for all the samples, and simultaneously
they are much more important for the target subtype samples than for the others. We
considered the features with high relative scores for each subtype to be the important
features that characterize the corresponding subtype.
Deep enrichment analysis method
In addition to the importance scores, the PWL model implements a deep
learning-based enrichment analysis method to extract the canonical pathway in the
nature of the breast subtypes, as summarized in Fig. 1. Prior to the enrichment
analysis, we trained the deep learning model (indicated by the orange box (1)) with
copy number values as the feature vectors and the subtypes as the target variables. Step
(1) of the pipeline utilizes the inner vectors of the hidden layer. The outputs of the NN
(deep learning) inner layers give us some hints as to what criteria the NNs use to classify
the subtypes of breast cancer from the feature vector. The output of the final inner
layer (a new feature vector ϕ) can be linearly separated by a single hyperplane spanned
by w′, as shown in Eq. (2). When the prediction accuracy is high, the output of the
final inner layer provides a well-summarized representation of the feature vector x for
the classification task. We utilized the reallocation vector η as the inner vectors, as
July 20, 2022
10/25

shown in Fig. 1 (the output of (1)).
To determine the subtype classification criteria, the second step of the pipeline (Fig.
1 (2)) utilizes a manifold learning technique called UMAP for the dimensionality
reduction [26]. The UMAP then compresses the reallocation vectors η into a
one-dimensional (1D) vector. The third step (Fig. 1 (3)) then calculates the Spearman’s
correlation coefficient for the relationship between the 1D vector (the projection of η)
and RNA-seq values, after which we select the top 250 genes for which the correlation
coefficient was positive and the top 250 genes for which the correlation coefficient was
negative. The final step of the pipeline (Fig. 1 (4)) analyzes these genes by using
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, QIAGEN, [27]) to interpret the canonical pathways.
Evaluation methodology
The subtype prediction models were built by using logistic regression with
regularization (implemented by scikit-learn v0.22, Python 3.7.6), SNNs (implemented by
PyTorch 1.5, Python 3.7.6), and PWL (implemented by PyTorch 1.5, Python 3.7.6).
Our objective was to obtain a more accurate explainable model using deep learning.
Therefore, we compared the explainability of the PWL method (our proposed method)
with the explainability of representative logistic regression.
If the hyperparameters of a prediction model (e.g., the number of layers) are
optimized by using all samples, we may overlook the hyperparameter overfitting. To
address this issue, we carried out the prediction model evaluation by a K-fold double
cross-validation (DCV) [28]. The K-fold DCV can measure the prediction performance
of the entire learning process including its hyperparameter optimization. The procedure
of K-fold DCV has internal (training) and outer (test) loops. In this study, each
internal loop searches for the best hyperparameter set (i.e., best combinations of the
hyperparameters) of the prediction model L times by using a tree-structured Parzen
estimator [29,30], where a single nested loop in the inner loops uses M-fold CV to
evaluate the prediction performance of the prediction model with a hyperparameter set.
Each inner loop trains the prediction models with different hyperparameter sets L × M
times. Then, each outer loop tests the prediction model with the best hyperparameter
set obtained by its internal loop. The hyperparameter optimization process is thus
July 20, 2022
11/25

completely separated from the test data. In our experiment, we set M = K = 10 and L
= 100, and trained the prediction model by 10,000 (K × L × M) times.
In each iteration of the 10-fold DCV and its internal 10-fold CV, the mean area
under the curve (AUC) was calculated as
Mean AUC =
1
KC
K
X
k=1
X
t∈subtypes
AUC(k, t),
(7)
where subtypes is a set of subtype categories (C = 5: Normal, Luminal A, Luminal B,
Basal and Her2), and AUC(k, t) is the k-th and subtype t’s AUC.
According to the IPA’s help and support pages, the p-value is calculated using the
right-tailed Fisher Exact Test. The p-value for a pathway is thus calculated by
considering:
1. the number of genes that participate in that pathway, and
2. the total number of genes in the QIAGEN Knowledge Base that are known to be
associated with that pathway.
Results
Prediction performance
In advance of the breast cancer subtypes analysis, we evaluated three subtype
prediction models: one built by using logistic regression with regularization, one using
SNNs (state-of-the-art feed-forward NNs), and the proposed PWL.
Table 2 lists the AUC values of 10-fold DCV for the RNA-seq and the copy number
features. All data of the 10-fold DCV was stored in S1 File). The hyperparameter
search ranges and values of each prediction model were stored in S2 File. Values in the
’All’ column in Table 2 were calculated using Eq. (7). The AUC value of each subtype
was then averaged by the 10-fold DCV. All models with the RNA-seq features achieved
AUC over 0.90. The logistic regression model was better than the deep learning models.
The PWL model with the copy number features marked the best values (training: 0.859,
test: 0.862) of ’All’. The AUC values of the SNN model were lower than 0.8.
July 20, 2022
12/25

Table 2. Mean AUC values of 10-fold DCV results.
Feature vectors
Models
Training
Test
All
All
Normal
Luminal A
Luminal B
Basal
Her2
RNA-seq
Logistic
0.983
0.985
0.984
0.977
0.972
0.999
0.993
SNNs
0.933
0.930
0.843
0.948
0.930
0.990
0.940
PWL
0.980
0.975
0.956
0.966
0.964
0.999
0.992
Copy number
Logistic
0.851
0.853
0.883
0.805
0.746
0.985
0.845
SNNs
0.772
0.745
0.644
0.752
0.615
0.972
0.742
PWL
0.859
0.862
0.879
0.817
0.779
0.986
0.848
Logistic: Logistic regression
Normal: Normal-like
Basal: Basal-like
Her2: Her2-enriched
Importance analysis
We further investigated the PWL model by comparing the overlap between the
important genes and the PAM50 genes. Then, the top 500 genes in terms of the relative
score (stored in S3 File) calculated by the importance analysis (see Feature importance
calculation in the Methods section) were selected as highly contributing feature
variables to predict subtypes. We then checked how many PAM50 genes were included
(S5 Fig.). Note that the SNN model (unexplainable deep learning) cannot provide
feature importance. Table 3 summarizes the overlap rate between the Top 500 and the
PAM50 genes. As expected, when trained with RNA-seq, both the logistic regression
and PWL models contained 44 and 41 of PAM50 genes, respectively, but when training
on copy number data, the overlaps of PAM50 genes were low: 14 and 15 out of 50 genes,
respectively.
Table 3. Number of overlaps between PAM50 genes and top 500 important genes in
each model.
Feature vectors
Models
All
Normal
Luminal A
Luminal B
Basal
Her2
RNA-seq
Logistic
44
10
27
22
15
13
PWL
41
7
22
22
10
13
Copy number
Logistic
14
1
3
4
3
8
PWL
15
5
3
1
1
7
Logistic: Logistic regression
Normal: Normal-like
Basal: Basal-like
Her2: Her2-enriched
To examine which aspects of these contributing feature genes differed, in each model
July 20, 2022
13/25

trained with copy number data, we compared those genes across the subtypes in Fig. 4
(S3 Fig. shows the results of the RNA-seq). We found that the majority of the
contributing feature genes were specific in certain subtypes because they were not
selected in other subtypes. In addition, a comparison between modeling methods showed
that the PWL model tended to have a higher proportion of the specific genes than the
logistic regression model for all tumor subtypes. Duplication of the specific genes
between the two models showed not much commonality with 206 genes even in the most
overlapping Her2 subtype, as summarized in Table 4 (S1 Table summarizes the results of
the RNA-seq). The Her2 subtype is a class in which the amplification of the HER2 gene
is enriched, and many genes in the vicinity of the HER2 (also known as ERBB2 and is
located on chromosome 17) gene were commonly contained (please see the ideogram of
chromosome 17 as shown in S6 Fig.). S2 Table summarizes the chromosomal location
for the common genes as the specific features of the Her2-enriched class in the logistic
regression and PWL models. Since both models were generated from copy number data,
it is reasonable that they had a relatively high degree of commonality.
0
441
33
26
390
60
50
388
60
33
19
360
50
45
26
19
455
45
442
28 20 9 1
448
20 18 11 2 1
429
28 19 18 3 2 1
476
21 3
438
21 19 11 9 2
Intersection size
(Number of genes)
Intersection size
(Number of genes)
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
100
200
300
400
500
 Her2-enriched
 Basal-like
 Luminal B
 Luminal A
 Normal-like
Fig 4. Intersections of top 500 gene sets calculated by importance analysis of the copy
number. (a) PWL model. (b) Logistic regression model.
Table 4. Commonalities of specific feature genes for copy number.
PWL
Normal-like
Luminal A
Luminal B
Basal-like
Her2-enriched
Logistic
Normal-like
37
21
0
0
0
Luminal A
10
43
39
3
0
Luminal B
4
0
117
7
4
Basal-like
2
60
0
82
3
Her2-enriched
6
3
3
3
206
Logistic: Logistic regression
July 20, 2022
14/25

Enrichment analysis
The previous subsection compared the PWL and logistic regression models by
evaluating the overlap rates of the PAM50 genes. As Table 3 shows, the PWL model
with the copy number features used genes other than the PAM50 genes for subtype
classification. In this subsection, we performed enrichment analysis to determine which
pathways were used by the PWL model with the copy number features to classify the
subtypes. Then, we compared the pathways enriched from the PWL model and the
SNNs model as deep learning.
Figure 5 shows the 1D and 2D embeddings of the reallocation vector (RV η) and the
reallocated feature (RF ρ, and the final inner vector of SNNs (ϕ in Eq. (2)) for the copy
number features (S4 Fig. shows the results of the RNA-seq). The RV vector reflected
the clinical features (ER−/PR−/Her2−). As shown in Fig. 5 (a), Luminal A and B
were stuck together, but each peak of their 1D embeddings stood in a distinct position.
Her2-enriched samples were close to the clusters of the Luminal A and B samples. The
2D embedding of RV η (Fig. 5 (a)) shows that the basal-like samples stayed away from
other subtypes. Normal-like samples took a position under the Luminal and
Her2-enriched samples. In the case of RFρ embeddings, all subtypes formed a single
cluster, as shown in Fig. 5 (c). The embeddings of SNNs were separated for each
subtype, as shown in Fig. 5 (d).
These subtypes were originally grouped by PAM50 on the basis of the mRNA
expression level. For this reason, we investigated which kind of mRNA expression levels
of the genes were associated with the 1D embeddings of RV η, RF ρ, and the inner
vector of the SNN model to figure out the difference of the three vectors focusing on
models from only copy number data. We obtained each of the top 500 genes correlated
with the mRNA expression values and then examined their functionally enriched
pathways using IPA. Those genes derived from RV η were overlapped with cell
cycle-related pathways such as “Kinetochore metaphase signaling pathway”, “G2/M
DNA damage checkpoint regulation”, “Estrogen-mediated S-phase entry”, “Mitotic
roles of Polo-like kinase”, and “Cell cycle control of chromosomal replication”. In
contrast, the ones derived from RF ρ showed little significant enrichment, as
summarized in Table 5 (the full list is available in S4 File). The gene from the SNN
July 20, 2022
15/25

Normal-like    Luminal A    Luminal B    Basal-like    Her2-enriched
Density
Density
Density
a
c
e
b
d
f
Fig 5. Embeddings of deep learning models with copy number features projected by
UMAP. (a), (b) Top, (c), (d) middle, and (e), (f) bottom panels are 1D and 2D
embeddings of RV η, RF ρ, and SNNs, respectively.
model that enriched pathways suggested the occurrence of a cell cycle during growth
and development; however, its statistical significance was low. The cell cycle is an
essential function of cell proliferation and affects the characteristics and malignancy of
cancer [31]. Both the PWL and SNN models recognized those pathways in the subtype
classification, and the PWL model’s η actually presented multiple related pathways. We
performed the same analysis for the PWL model generated from only RNA-seq data
(the enriched pathways were stored in S4 File) and found that RV η genes from
RNA-seq/copy number data more significantly enriched the cell cycle pathway.
July 20, 2022
16/25

Table 5. Enriched pathways that the top 500 genes’ mRNA expression level were
associated with the 1D embeddings of RV η, RF ρ, and the inner vector of SNNs in
UMAP.
Canonical pathways in IPA
−log10(p-value)
RV η
RF ρ
SNNs
Kinetochore metaphase signaling pathway
20.65
2.05
5.40
Cell cycle: G2/M DNA damage checkpoint regulation
10.65
0.00
0.00
Estrogen-mediated S-phase entry
10.23
0.37
2.70
Mitotic roles of Polo-like kinase
10.12
0.00
0.39
Cell cycle control of chromosomal replication
9.97
0.00
0.00
Role of CHK proteins in cell cycle checkpoint control
8.72
0.93
0.47
Cyclins and cell cycle regulation
8.66
0.28
1.00
Role of BRCA1 in DNA damage response
6.98
1.06
0.00
Cell cycle: G1/S checkpoint regulation
6.80
0.00
1.85
tRNA charging
1.32
4.83
0.25
ERBB signaling
0.00
1.32
3.78
Discussion
For the RNA-seq features, the logistic regression model was a better predictor of the
PAM50 subtypes than the deep learning models, as summarized in 2. This result is
reasonable because the subtypes as the target variables were detected from the RNA-seq
expression pattern analysis through the PAM50 assay. The significant relationships
between the RNA-seq features and the subtypes were relatively simple and suitable for
the logistic regression model. On the other hand, the feature vector size and the
configuration of the large dimensional feature size (D = 17, 837) and small sample size
(n = 810) decreased the generalization ability of the deep learning models (training:
0.980, test: 0.975). Here, a more meaningful result than the prediction accuracy was
that the deep learning model used 41 genes of PAM50 to classify the subtypes, as
summarized in Table 3. The reasoning was that the PWL model with the RNA-seq
features uses the PAM50 genes to predict the subtypes derived from the PAM50 assay.
These results demonstrated that the PWL model was a semantically valid model and
encouraged us to apply the PWL model to reveal the relationships between the copy
number features and the subtypes.
PAM50 subtype prediction from the copy number features is not a trivial task
compared to prediction from the RNA-seq. The AUC values of the PWL model were
better than those of the logistic regression and SNN models throughout the 10-fold
July 20, 2022
17/25

DCV. The SNN model experienced overfitting, as demonstrated by the higher AUC
values in the training results and the lower AUC values in the test results (Table 2).
One possible reason for this overfitting is that the progression of learning is confined to
the upper-layer parameters: i.e., there is a lack of advanced learning in the lower layers.
Klambauer et al. showed that SNNs could use 32 layers in the conventional machine
learning dataset [19]. In our task, the number of the SNN model’s inner layers (average
13, minimum 10, and maximum 16, as summarized in S2 File) was lower than that of
the PWL model (average 19, minimum 12, and maximum 24, as summarized in S2 File).
We thus optimized the number of both models’ inner layers from 10 to 25. As shown in
Fig. 2, the PWL model contains a deep learning block to generate the custom-made
logistic regression model, so its model likely causes overfitting when the number of
layers is increased. We used a unified architecture (see S1 Appendix and [32]) in this
study as a newly developed deep learning architecture characterized by the binding of
each network layer, with neurons arranged in a mesh-like form. This unified
architecture has horizontally shallow and vertically deep layers to prevent gradient
vanishing and explosion. No matter how many layers are stacked vertically, there are
only two horizontal layers from the data unit neurons to the output neurons.
The logistic regression model and the PWL model had almost equivalent prediction
performances for the copy number features. On the other hand, Table 4 suggests that
the genes important for predicting the breast cancer subtypes were different in the two
models: namely, the PWL model tended to select specific genes for each subtype, as
shown in Fig. 4. This difference is considered to stem from the models’ ability to treat
the nonlinear relationships between feature and target variables. The logistic regression
expresses the target variables only as linear combinations of the feature variables, while
the PWL can express the target variables nonlinearly, as in Eqs. (3) and (4). In
addition, these two equations can be modified as w · (η(x) ⊙x). The RV η corrects the
feature variables x so that the universal weight w can linearly separate the feature
vector x. The differences of important genes between the PWL and logistic regression
methods stem from the feature variables’ correction mechanism of the PWL method.
This mechanism might also help the PWL model express the target variables without
using some of the features not specific to the subtype. In contrast, the logistic
regression model has to use nonspecific features to express the target variables without
July 20, 2022
18/25

the corrections. We expect the PWL model’s correction mechanism to be vital in tasks
that demand high nonlinearity and consequently result in low AUC values in logistic
regression. One of the tasks in this study was to predict subtypes Luminal A and B (see
Table 2). Consistently, the difference of the number of specific genes in the two models
was large in Luminal A and B, and the specific genes for Luminal A and B in the PWL
model had much in common with the specific genes of other subtypes in the logistic
regression model, as shown in Table 4.
As discussed above, the results in Fig. 4, Tables 2, and 4) are consistent with the
interpretation of the PWL model from the viewpoint of the correction to the features.
This consistency suggests that our scoring method (described in ’Feature importance
calculation method’ in the Methods section) works properly. Our scoring method was
designed to extract the features that contribute to predicting a subtype, especially
among the corresponding subtype samples, rather than features not found in the other
samples. This scoring method helps us clarify which features contribute to the
prediction result with the aid of corrections by RV η, but we cannot examine which
features contribute to the corrections η. Therefore, the relative score is not a perfect
measure to investigate the mechanism of the classification of breast cancer subtypes.
For further investigation, we analyzed our predictive model’s internal state in detail
by using the deep enrichment analysis method, as shown in Fig. 1. The results suggest
that the gene sets’ biological implications contribute to the classification. From the
comparison of RV η, RF ρ as the PWL model’s inner vectors to be analyzed, we found
that RV η was better suited to elicit candidate hypotheses. As shown in Fig. 1 (2)
through (4), we utilized UMAP to analyze the internal state in detail and reduce the
dimensionality and then combined it with mRNA expression levels, which derived the
biological implication that η was involved in the cell cycle. The fact that genes involved
in the cell cycle affect subtypes is well-known [33], and such genes have been reported as
promising drug targets [31], indicating that the internal state of our model was worth
analyzing. Note that the UMAP embedding of RV η, rather than the ones of RF ρ and
ϕ, contains richer information related to interpretable pathways. While RF ρ is created
as new features with which the problem is linearly separable in the PWL model (as well
as ϕ in the SNN model), RV η is considered as the corrections to the features by which
the features are transformed into RF ρ, and is unique to the PWL model. This finding
July 20, 2022
19/25

suggests that it is essential to analyze the corrections to the features for our task in
order to investigate the breast cancer subtypes classification mechanism. Regarding
further analysis or hypotheses, the PWL model’s η is preferred, as it presented multiple
related pathways in this report. Considering this case as an example, we feel confident
that biologists and informaticians can apply our analysis with RV η to other tasks, such
as exploring new drug target molecules or investigating mechanisms.
The limitation of this study is the retrospective analysis of the breast cancer data.
All results obtained from the prediction models should be evaluated by clinical practice
as a prospective study. Even so, the results of this retrospective study demonstrate the
potential of our technique to reveal unknown and nonstandard knowledge of breast
cancer.
Conclusion
This study has established the PWL model as an innately explainable deep learning
model that can analyze the biological mechanisms of breast cancer subtypes. The PWL
model generates a custom-made logistic regression model, which allows us to analyze
which genes are important for each subtype of an individual patient. We presented a
new scoring method for selecting genes for the subtype classification, and also
demonstrated that the deep enrichment analysis method with the PWL model can
extract the genes relevant to cell cycle-related pathways. Our PWL model utilized as
explainable deep learning can reveal the mechanisms underlying cancers and thereby
contribute to improving overall clinical outcomes.
Author Contributions
Conceptualization:
Takuma Shibahara, Chisa Wada, Yasuho Yamashita, Kazuhiro
Fujita, Masamichi Sato, Atsushi Okamoto, Yoshimasa Ono.
Methodology:
Takuma Shibahara, Chisa Wada, Yasuho Yamashita, Kazuhiro Fujita.
Data curation:
Chisa Wada, Kazuhiro Fujita.
July 20, 2022
20/25

Software:
Takuma Shibahara, Yasuho Yamashita.
Visualization:
Junichi Kuwata, Takuma Shibahara.
Project administration:
Takuma Shibahara, Atsushi Okamoto, Yoshimasa Ono.
Writing – original draft preparation:
Takuma Shibahara, Chisa Wada, Yasuho
Yamashita, Kazuhiro Fujita.
Writing – review & editing:
Takuma Shibahara, Chisa Wada, Yasuho Yamashita,
Kazuhiro Fujita, Masamichi Sato, Junichi Kuwata, Atsushi Okamoto, Yoshimasa Ono.
