Analysis of the Relation between Artificial Intelligence and the
Internet from the Perspective of Brain Science
Feng Liua,b, 一*, Yong Shi a,b, c,d, *, Peijia Lia,b
aResearch Center on Fictitious Economy and Data Science, the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
bThe Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
cCollege of Information Science and Technology University of Nebraska at Omaha, Omaha, NE 68182, USA
dSchool of Economics and Management, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
Abstract
Artificial intelligence (AI) like deep learning, cloud AI computation has been advancing at a rapid pace since 2014. There is
no doubt that the prosperity of AI is inseparable with the development of the Internet. However, there has been little
attention to the link between AI and the internet. This paper explores them with brain insights mainly from four views:1)
How is the general relation between artificial intelligence and Internet of Things, cloud computing, big data and Industrial
Internet from the perspective of brain science. 2) Construction of a new AI system model with the Internet and brain science.
Keywords: Internet's virtual brain ,Big SNS, AI model of the Internet-like brain;
1. How is the general relation between artificial intelligence and Internet of Things, cloud computing, big
data and Industrial Internet from the perspective of brain science
A mass of new applications and features of the Internet have emerged in the past 20 years. For example, a
printer or copying machine is remotely controlled; doctors perform operations through the remote network;
Chinese water conservancy authorities place sensors in the soil, rivers and air so that the temperature, humidity,
wind speed could be transmitted to the information processing center timely through the Internet, thus a report
is formed, providing reference for decision-making in flood and drought control; Google launched the "Street
View" service, with which, multi-lens cameras may be installed in a city so that the Internet users can enjoy the
real-time scenes in Denver, Las Vegas, Miami, New York and San Francisco and other cities. It is not difficult
to find that the structure of Internet is getting more and more similar to the brain structure.
These new Internet phenomena can be taken as the buddings of the motor nervous system, the
somatosensory nervous system and the visual nervous system respectively. Based on the above new
phenomena of the Internet, we published an article entitled Findings and Analysis on the Law of the Internet
Evolution in September 2008, which analyzed the mature structure of the Internet from the perspective of
neurology and abstracted it as an organizational structure that is highly similar to the human brain, namely the
Internet virtual brain. It mainly focuses on finding and locating the position of the Internet's virtual hearing,
visual, sensory, motor nervous systems and virtual central nervous system, etc. The brain-like structure chart of
the Internet [1] is given in Fig.1.
* Corresponding author.

From this figure, we could reanalyze the Internet of Things, cloud computing, big data, artificial intelligence
(deep learning), Industry 4.0, Industrial Internet, unmanned aerial vehicles, intelligent driving and virtual
reality, the following conclusions may be drawn.
1.1. Internet of Things is the budding of the sensory nervous system of the Internet brain
In November 2005, the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) released a report entitled ITU Internet
Reports 2005: The Internet of Things, which formally proposed the item "Internet of Things (IOT)". The report
did not define the Internet of Things exactly. But from a functional point of view, the ITU believes, that "all
objects in the world can actively exchange information through the Internet, to achieve any interconnection
between objects, omnipresent networks and omnipresent computing anytime and anywhere"; From a technical
point of view, the ITU also believes that "the Internet of Things involves radio frequency identification
technology (RFID)[2], sensor technology, nanotechnology and intelligent technology, etc."
Internet of Things highlights the concept of sensor perception, and it has the functions of network line
transmission, information storage & processing, and industrial application interface, etc. Meanwhile, it often
shares server, network lines and application interface with the Internet, which may be considered as the
budding of the sensory nervous system of the Internet brain.
1.2. Cloud computing is the budding of the central nervous system of the Internet brain
After IBM and Google announced their cooperation in the field of cloud computing in October 2007, cloud
computing has quickly become a hot issue in the industrial and academic research[3]. The birth of cloud
computing has its historical roots. With the development of the Internet, the demand of the Internet's data
storage capacity of emerging applications is growing and the Internet business is expanding as well. Therefore,
the hardware and software maintenance costs of the Internet enterprises continue to increase, posing a heavy
burden to most of them. At the same time, the Internet super-large enterprises such as Google, IBM and
Amazon have a lot of spare hardware and software resources that are not fully utilized. In this case, It becomes
a necessary trend that the Internet reforms from constructing the hardware and software separately to sharing
the centralized cloud computing.

In the Internet virtual brain architecture, the central nervous system of the Internet virtual brain is the
Internet’s core hardware layer, which binds to the information layer to provide support and services for the
virtual neural systems of the Internet. From the definition point of view, the cloud computing has consistent
characteristics with the central nervous system of the Internet virtual brain. In an ideal situation, the sensor of
Internet of Things or the Internet user interacted with cloud computing through the network lines and computer
terminals, provide data to the cloud computing and accept the services.
1.3. Industry 4.0, Industrial Internet, unmanned aerial vehicles, intelligent driving and 3D are essentially the
budding of the Internet motor nervous system
The Internet’s central nervous system, namely the software system in cloud computing, controls the
production equipment of industrial enterprises, household appliances, office equipment. It makes the machinery
equipment such as intelligence, 3D printing and wireless sensor become the tools for the Internet brain to
reform the world. At the same time, these intelligent manufactures and intelligent equipment also return data to
the Internet brain so that the Internet central nervous system performs decision-making depending on such data.
In the entire process, the technologies and applications such as Industry 4.0, Industrial Internet, unmanned
aerial vehicles, intelligent driving, 3D printing are just the products from the development and budding of the
Internet’s motor nervous system.
1.4. Big data is the basis of Internet brain information
With the rise of technologies such as blogs, social networks, cloud computing, Internet of Things, and
Industrial Internet, the data and information on the Internet are growing and accumulating at an unprecedented
rate. Internet users’ interaction with each other, information from enterprises and governments, and the real-
time information from Internet of Things sensors are generating enormous amounts of structured and
unstructured data at all times. Such data is scattered throughout the Internet network system in a huge volume.
The data contains very valuable information on the economy, science and technology, education and so on.
This is namely the background for the rise of the Internet data[4].
1.5. AI is the foundation of Internet intelligence, wisdom and awareness
Artificial intelligence, as the hottest issue in the Internet field since 2014, has been widely concerned by the
scientific community, business and media. It was initially proposed as a concept by a group of far-sighted
young scientists headed by McCarthy, Minsky, Rochester and Shennong in the summer of 1956 when they got
together to study and explore the simulation of intelligence using machine and a series of other related issues.
In fact, the development of artificial intelligence is full of ups and downs. In the past 60 years, artificial
intelligence has experienced many stages from optimism to pessimism, the climax to the low ebb. The latest
low ebb occurred in 1992 when Japan's fifth-generation computer program was fruitless. Thereafter, the
hotness in artificial neural network was cooled down at the beginning of the 1990s and the artificial intelligence
field entered the "AI Winter" once again. That winter was so cold and long till 2006 when professor Geoffrey
Hinton from Canadian University of Canada proposed "deep learning" algorithm, the situation was changed.
This algorithm is an ingenious upgrade to the artificial neural network theory, which was born in the 1940s
The greatest innovation is the ability to process enormous amounts of data efficiently. Luckily, the feature was
combined with the Internet, which led to a new upsurge of artificial intelligence since 2010. In 2011, a NCAP
researcher and Andrew Ng from Stanford, namely Wu Enda who became the chief scientist of Baidu brain later,
established Google brain based on deep learning. In 2013, Geoffrey Hinton joined Google, aiming to conduct
Google brain more deeply.
After that artificial intelligence entered a new era -- the era of Internet artificial intelligence. Based on the
mass "big data" of the Internet and its information exchange with the real-world, Baidu brain, Hyper brain and

other Internet artificial intelligence systems also have emerged since 2014, and then new areas and records are
continuously created.
From the above research, whether the Internet of Things, cloud computing, big data, Industry 4.0, Industrial
Internet, unmanned aerial vehicles, intelligent driving, virtual reality or artificial intelligence (deep learning),
they are still the products in the development process of the Internet, and they should be studied and considered
in the large scale of the Internet evolution[5] (Fig.2).
Fig.2 the Internet of Things, cloud computing, big data, artificial intelligence in Internet's virtual brain
2. Construction of a new AI system model with the Internet and brain science
2.1. The brain-like Internet architecture provides new insights for the establishment of new artificial
intelligence systems
The Internet born in the last century has brought more and more influence on the human society. Various
signs indicate that the Internet has a close relation with brain science. From 2005, the research suggests that
“the Internet will evolve toward the state highly similar to the human brain. It will not only have its own visual,
auditory, tactile,, motor nervous systems, but also have its own memory nervous system, central nervous
system and autonomic nervous system. On the other hand, the human brain has evolved all the Internet
functions at least tens of thousands of years ago, and the continuously-developing Internet will help
neurologists to reveal the secret of the brain.”
This research inspires us to explore if it is possible to build the artificial intelligence system model
simulating the Internet brain in a supercomputer by the Internet function and architecture Meanwhile it need us
to check if it is also possible to increase or reduce relevant functions and architectures in the building process
according to the latest development of the Internet. The software system of this model can also be integrated in
the chip.
2.2. The implementation of the artificial intelligence system with the Internet-like brain
The theoretical basis of the artificial intelligence system with the Internet-like brain is to implement the
above-mentioned brain-like model of the Internet in the supercomputer. Besides it should combine the stable
typical application and architecture of the Internet, simulate with the program and database, and present them in
a visual form.

As a huge system, the Internet, after experiencing nearly 45 years of development, has already contained
thousands of applications and subsystems. In addition, as the result of rapid development, the Internet has new
applications every day. When using the Internet brain model, it is hard to contain all the Internet applications
and subsystems in practice.
Therefore, we proposed to conduct the test by establishing the application library of the artificial intelligence
system with the Internet-like brain (IBML) using the selected relatively-mature Internet applications with a
high penetration rate. The applications in the application library of the artificial intelligence system model of
the Internet-like brain may be added or reduced regularly according to the development of the Internet. This
can avoid the problems like numerous Internet applications and frequent simultaneous disappearance and
emergence. For example, we can establish an application library of the artificial intelligence system model of
the Internet-like brain which is similar to the one below:
IBML= {Google, Facebook, Blogger, Amazon, Yahoo, YouTube, Quora, Wikipedia, Twitter, IPv4/IPv6...}
Through the establishment of the application library of the artificial intelligence system model of the
Internet-like brain, it is possible to establish a new artificial intelligence system model by imitating the Internet
function and architecture in the supercomputer. The establishment of the artificial intelligence system model of
the Internet-like brain includes the following three steps:
Step I. Hardware basis for the artificial intelligence system of the Internet-like brain: 1) Large-size
computer; 2) Laboratory-level sensor network. The sensor network will interact with the other parts of the brain
model in the "neuron" social network account in the Internet brain-like model.
Step II. Realization of the functions of the artificial intelligence system of the Internet-like brain
1. Establishing the micro-social network, Wikipedia and search engine functions in this artificial intelligence
system of the Internet-like brain
2. Connecting the virtual visual, auditory, sensory and motion systems built in the micro Internet of Things
into the artificial intelligence system of the Internet-like brain
3. Operating the micro-social network, Wikipedia and search engine, as well as the micro Internet of Things
system built in the artificial intelligence system model of the Internet-like brain to generate big data
4. Applying the artificial intelligence algorithms like machine learning and deep learning to the artificial
intelligence system model of the Internet-like brain (Fig.3).
Fig.3 the artificial intelligence system model of the Internet-like brain
Step III. Present the operation of the artificial intelligence system of the Internet-like brain in the
server in a visual way by using data visualization technology as the interactive interface so that people
can control it by neuron accounts simulating social network.

Study method: Continue to improve, update and study the artificial intelligence system model of the
Internet-like brain, and add new functions in the Internet and brain science to the model to conduct testing;
continue to add information and knowledge base systems in the artificial intelligence system model of the
Internet-like brain; perform the artificial intelligence processing and experiment personnel active operation
processing on each neuron simulating social network; and observe the intelligent characteristics of the artificial
intelligence system model of the Internet-like brain.
3. Conclusion:
The combination of Internet, brain science and artificial intelligence is related a number of fields and has
some influence on them, including smart city, artificial intelligence, Internet of Things, cloud computing, big
data, robots, Industrial Internet, brain science, philosophy of science and technology and etc. The new
achievements in these fields will be introduced in our papers in the future.
References：
[1] Feng Liu. Crossover Comparative Study on the Internet and Neurologyn[J]. Complex Systems and
Complexity Science, 2010, 104-115.
[2]. qianzhi-hong,wang yi-jun. internet of things –oriented wireless sensor networds review. Journal of
Electronics & Information Technology,2013 1:223
[3].zhangjianxun, guzhimi, zhangchao.survay of research progress on cloud computing. Application
research of computers,2010 27(2): 431
[4]. mengxiaofeng, chixiang. Big data management: concepts
techniques and challenges.
Journal of
Computer Research and Development ,2013, 1:98
[5] Feng Liu.Structure and Operation Mechanism of Internet Virtual Brain[J].2014 IEEE Internat-ional
Conference on Computer and Information Technology，2014(13)：162-17.
