GAME OF INTELLIGENT LIFE ∗
Marlene Grieskamp
Interactive Intelligence
University of Washington
Seattle, WA

Chaytan Inman
Interactive Intelligence
University of Washington
Seattle, WA

Shaun Lee
Interactive Intelligence
University of Washington
Seattle, WA

ABSTRACT
Cellular automata captivate researchers due to the emergent, complex individualized behavior that
simple global rules of interaction enact. Recent advances in the ﬁeld have combined cellular automata
with convolutional neural networks to achieve self-regenerating images. This new branch of cellular
automata is called neural cellular automata [1]. The goal of this project is to use the idea of neural
cellular automata to grow prediction machines. We place many different convolutional neural
networks in a grid. Each conv net cell outputs a prediction of what the next state will be, and
minimizes predictive error. Cells received either their neighbors colors and ﬁtness as input. Each
cell’s ﬁtness score described how accurate its predictions were. Cells could also move to explore their
environment.
Keywords Cellular Automata · Convolutional Neural Networks · Residual Networks
1
Introduction and Context
Overall, we explore the possibility of emergent behaviors in a multi-agent setting with a simple goal of predicting the
next state of the game. By giving each cell agency with a convolutional neural network, we were able to explore more
complex multi-agent behavior, giving each agent a short term memory in the form of convolutional parameters, and the
ability to explore vs exploit their environment through their output movements. The goal was to explore the types of
emerging behavior from groups of CNN agents with a selective pressure toward better predictions of the next state.
Question
In an environment where pixel agents are given mechanisms to self-replicate, compete, communicate, and predict, are
these channels enough for the emergence of centralized control from distinct agents?
Related Work
This work was heavily inspired by the paper “Growing Neural Cellular Automata” 1, as well as by the original Game of
Life by John Conway 2. The ResNet architecture was also borrowed and modiﬁed from this tutorial 3. Finally, the
idea of a ﬁtness value for the cells comes from the ﬁeld of genetic algorithms. The guiding question and following
philosophical implications are deeply connected to the works of Deleuze and Simondon among other philosophers and
physicists.
Assumptions
• Macroscopic wholes can emerge from discretized atomic agents
• Intelligent, accurate predictions of the world emerge from resource scarcity, thus a system requiring accurate
predictions to grow imposes resource constraints correlated to those which life imposes on cell division and
growth.
• We can model primordial selves with self replicating simpliﬁed agents given arbitrary, nonstationary bounds
on themselves in the form of a pixel.
∗Full Demo Visuals: https://chaytanc.github.io/gil
arXiv:2301.00897v1  [cs.NE]  2 Jan 2023

Game of Intelligent Life
• The foundational goal of life is to self replicate, and that self replication does not imply intelligence, but
greater intelligence can often improve self replication.
• Through coordination of self replicated beings, the self can expand.
2
Methodology
1. Convolutional neural networks are randomly generated on a 100x100 grid.
• A cell_grid object keeps track of the object positions.
• A grid object keeps track of the vectorized form of the cells at the positions.
• An intermediate cell grid object keeps track of the possibly overlapping movements of cells.
2. We begin the ﬁrst frame by running forward on all conv nets, passing each one its 3x3 neighboring cells.
3. The outputs are the predicted colors and ﬁtnesses of 3x3 neighbors in the next frame, and a movement
represented by ﬁve channels.
• The movement property of cells is updated.
4. The movements of the cells are computed from the output movement channels. This updates the intermediate
cell grid.
5. If cells overlap, their ﬁtnesses are used to determine which one takes precedence, resolving the intermediate
cell grid.
6. The cell_grid and grid objects are updated based on the resolved intermediate cell grid to get the new frame.
7. The output predicted colors and ﬁtnesses are compared to the actual colors and ﬁtnesses of the new frame.
8. The conv nets are updated using backpropagation.
9. The colors of each conv net in the grid are updated to reﬂect the changes in network parameters.
10. The ﬁtnesses of each conv net in the grid are updated to reﬂect the loss received.
3
Evaluation
The results of this experiment are exploratory; there was no desired outcome, but rather a desire to understand the
effects of various design choices on the simulated behavior. To understand the effects, we evaluated the loss of the
convolutional neural networks using mean squared error between a cell’s predicted next frame of the game and the
actual next frame of the game.
We test the following two methods of prediction:
• Each cell has partial observability of the 100x100 grid, and also predicts the partial state of the grid (3x3 input
and 3x3 output).
• Each cell has partial observability of the 100x100 grid, and predicts the full state of the grid (3x3 input and
100x100 output).
We run the following simulations for a different number of initial cells in the range [30, 100, 500] for partial observability
and plot the cell losses per epoch for randomly picked cells on the grid, as well as compute the average cell loss as a
measure of the overall prediction strength of the conv net for different initial starting states.
For each simulation, we perform a grid search over the following hyperparameters:
• Learning Rate = [0.1, 0.05, 0.01, 0.005, 0.001]
• Momentum = [0.9, 0.95, 0.97, 0.99]
2

Game of Intelligent Life
4
Results
For partial observability with partial state prediction, we plot the losses of 3 cells chosen from the grid:
Experiment 1 - 500 initial cells with 30 epochs
• Best hyperparameters: learning rate = 0.01, momentum = 0.99
• Avg. cell loss: 2017.8651
Figures 1.1 - 1.3:
3

Game of Intelligent Life
Experiment 2 - 100 initial cells with 30 epochs
• Best hyperparameters: learning rate = 0.01, momentum = 0.99
• Avg. cell loss: 1817.7762
Figures 2.1-2.3
4

Game of Intelligent Life
Experiment 3 - 30 initial cells with 30 epochs
• Best hyperparameters: learning rate = 0.005, momentum = 0.97
• Avg. cell loss: 1502.6859
Figures 3.1-3.3
5

Game of Intelligent Life
5
Discussion
Using a ResNet architecture, we ran into many issues with upsampling the 3x3 input to a 100x100 output prediction
over the whole grid. The result was a very high and unpredictable loss which did not converge. We found that Pytorch’s
given methods of upsampling for convolutional neural networks are not well suited for large changes in input sizes, and
we needed to add over 20 cells of padding to get the desired output size. We felt this was one reason for the high loss,
so we switched to a method of predicting only the cell’s neighbors. This meant that the cell’s input and output were
both 3x3x9.
We found that in the former situation where we tried to predict the full state of the grid given partial observability,
the loss spiked up and never converged. In the latter experiments 1-3, the loss does spike, but often returns to a low
baseline (seen in ﬁgures 1.1-1.3, 2.2, 2.3) and may sometimes converge to a lower value (seen in ﬁgures 2.1, 3.1-3.3).
Although the cause of these results are not exactly certain, we hypothesize that the spiking behavior is due to the cell
network learning the position of its neighbors, and then experiencing high loss when neighboring cells move. And
for other cells, we hypothesize that the converging behavior occurs when cells move around the grid and encounter
few/no neighbors, resulting in more accurate predictions as new cells would not suddenly appear in their ﬁeld of vision.
This may also be supported by the fact that the average cell loss is lower when we start the game with less initial
cells (shown in experiments 1-3), as the CNN has a harder time predicting the next state of the game when cells are
constantly moving in/out of the 3x3 neighbor grid. We theorize that the loss values are high due to the movement being
partially determined by the output of a network and partially determined by stochastic noise (where each cell has a 0.1
probability of taking a random action). This can be difﬁcult for cells to learn and may be one source of high/spiking
losses.
The next step may be to train the CNN on the full state/a larger partial state instead of the 3x3 partial state neighbors.
By giving the CNN more information, each cell may be better able to predict the next state of the game. Preliminary
investigations of this have shown that this signiﬁcantly increases training time and computation cost, so running this on
powerful devices (GPUs/TPUs) is recommended.
Future Directions Beyond that, we propose the following future implementations:
• Weight sharing or mixing between cells
– Instead of each cell having to learn individually, it can instead ‘absorb’ the learned parameters of other
cells to improve itself. This may lead to faster convergence and a lower average loss per cell.
• Random reproduction of highest ﬁtness cells to allow for clusters of high ﬁtness cells
– Similar to weight sharing: allows cells with the highest predictive power to clone themselves, leading to
faster convergence and lower average cell loss.
• Better recurrent CNN implementation
• Random death of lowest ﬁtness cells
– Removes cells with diverging loss from the game, leading to a more biologically accurate model.
• Channels through which convolutional networks can send scalar signals to other networks and in a sense
communicate
– Allows for the model to emulate speech/language between cells for more interesting effects.
• Neighbor’s predictions of a cell’s ﬁtness impacting the ﬁtness of the cell in question
– Allows for the model to emulate a ‘horde mentality’ between the cells for more interesting effects.
Possible Use Cases
• Self assembling images
• Modeling biological systems – bacteria colonies, multicellular organism formation
• Modeling physical systems at a particle level
• Economics, and other dynamic multi-agent systems with partial observability
6

Game of Intelligent Life
6
Demo and Source Code
The source code for this project is open source: Source Code
For a deeper dive into the demo as well as philosophical implications derived from the emergence of an individual
through cellular automata, see the following: Full Demos and Original Publication
Full Demo GIF 1
Full Demo GIF 2
This work was created with Interactive Intelligence, a student-led research group at the University of Washington. We
would like to thank the I2 advisor, Dr. Eric Chudler, for his support and guidance.
7

Game of Intelligent Life
7
