Genetic Algorithm-based Polar Code Construction
for the AWGN Channel
Ahmed Elkelesh, Moustafa Ebada, Sebastian Cammerer and Stephan ten Brink
Institute of Telecommunications, Pfaffenwaldring 47, University of Stuttgart, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany

Abstract—We propose a new polar code construction frame-
work (i.e., selecting the frozen bit positions) for the additive
white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, tailored to a given
decoding algorithm, rather than based on the (not necessarily
optimal) assumption of successive cancellation (SC) decoding. The
proposed framework is based on the Genetic Algorithm (GenAlg),
where populations (i.e., collections) of information sets evolve
successively via evolutionary transformations based on their
individual error-rate performance. These populations converge
towards an information set that ﬁts the decoding behavior. Using
our proposed algorithm, we construct a polar code of length
2048 with code rate 0.5, without the CRC-aid, tailored to plain
successive cancellation list (SCL) decoding, achieving the same
error-rate performance as the CRC-aided SCL decoding, and
leading to a coding gain of 1dB at BER of 10−6. Further, a
belief propagation (BP)-tailored polar code approaches the SCL
error-rate performance without any modiﬁcations in the decoding
algorithm itself.
I. INTRODUCTION
Polar codes [1] are the ﬁrst family of codes proven to
be capacity achieving for any Binary Input Discrete Memo-
ryless Channel (BI-DMC) and with an explicit construction
method under low complexity successive cancellation (SC)
decoding. However, for ﬁnite lengths, both the SC decoder
and the polar code itself (i.e., its maximum likelihood (ML)
performance) are shown to be sub-optimal when compared
to other state-of-the-art coding schemes such as low-density
parity-check (LDPC) codes. Later, Tal and Vardy introduced
a successive cancellation list (SCL) decoder [2] enabling a
decoding performance close to the ML bound for sufﬁciently
large list sizes. The concatenation with an additional high-rate
cyclic redundancy check (CRC) code [2] or parity-check (PC)
code [3] further improves the code performance itself, as it
increases the minimum distance and, thus, improves the weight
spectrum of the code. This simple concatenation renders polar
codes into a powerful coding scheme. Later, an extension of
polar codes, namely Polar Subcodes, were proposed in [4],
outperforming the above-mentioned code constructions. Polar
codes were recently selected by the 3GPP group as the channel
codes for the upcoming 5th generation mobile communication
standard (5G) uplink/downlink control channel [5].
Although several other decoding schemes such as the iter-
ative belief propagation (BP) decoding [6] and the iterative
belief propagation list (BPL) decoder [7] exist, their error-rate
performance is currently not competitive with the CRC-aided
SCL decoding. Therefore, a good polar code design tailored
to an explicit decoder may change this situation as it promises
This work has been supported by DFG, Germany, under grant BR 3205/5-1.
The authors would like to thank Alexander Vardy and Ido Tal for providing
their set of frozen/non-frozen bit positions as a baseline for comparison.
either an improved error-rate performance or savings in terms
of decoding complexity for a speciﬁc type of decoder. In this
work, we consider the decoding algorithm throughout the code
construction phase instead of constructing the code based on
the typical assumption of SC decoding. An intuitive example
why a design for SC is sub-optimal for other decoding schemes
can be given by considering the girth of the graph under BP
decoding, which strongly depends on the frozen positions of
the code. Thus, freezing additional nodes can even result in a
degraded decoding performance under BP decoding although
the ML performance indeed gets better (see Fig. 9 in [8]).
In a strict sense, one may argue that polar codes are
inherently connected with SC decoding and only a design
based on the concept of channel polarization results in a true
“polar” code. However, from a more practical point of view,
we seek to ﬁnd the most efﬁcient coding scheme for ﬁnite
length constraints and, with slight abuse of notation, we regard
the proposed codes as polar codes. Thus, a design method that
considers the decoder and improves the overall performance
is an important step for future polar code applications.
Polar code construction (or design), throughout this paper,
refers to selecting an appropriate frozen bit position pattern.
Different polar code construction algorithms exist assuming
SC decoding. However, an explicit design tailored to SCL or
BP decoding turns out to be cumbersome due to the many
dependencies in the decoding graph and the high dimension-
ality of the optimization problem. In this work, we propose a
new framework for polar code design matched to a speciﬁc
decoding algorithm embedded in the well-understood Genetic
Algorithm (GenAlg) context. As a result, the optimization
algorithm works on a speciﬁc error-rate simulation setup, i.e.,
it inherently takes into account the actual decoder and channel.
This renders the GenAlg-based polar code optimization into
a solid and powerful design method. To the best of our
knowledge, the resulting polar codes in this work outperform
any known design method for plain polar codes under SCL de-
coding without the aid of an additional CRC (i.e., CRC-aided
SCL performance could be achieved without the aid of a CRC).
Additionally, the BP decoder of the proposed code achieves
(and slightly outperforms) the SCL decoding performance of
conventional codes without any decoder modiﬁcations. The
interested reader can refer to [9] for an extended version.
II. POLAR CODES
Polar codes [1] are based on the concept of channel po-
larization, in which N = 2n identical copies of a channel W
are combined and N synthesized bit-channels are generated.
arXiv:1901.06444v1  [cs.IT]  19 Jan 2019

These synthesized bit-channels show a polarization behavior,
in the sense that some bit-channels are purely noiseless and
the rest are completely noisy. A recursive channel combination
provides the polarization matrix
GN = BN ·F⊗n,
F =

1
0
1
1

where BN is a bit-reversal permutation matrix and F⊗n denotes
the n-th Kronecker power of F. The polar codewords x are
given by x = u · GN, where u contains k information bits
and N −k frozen bits, w.l.o.g. we set the frozen positions
to “0”. The information set A contains the k most reliable
positions of u in which the k information bits are transmitted
and ¯A denotes the frozen positions (i.e., the complementary
set to A). The conventional generator matrix, denoted by G,
is constructed as the rows {ri} of GN with i ∈A. The task
of the polar code construction, in its original form, is to ﬁnd
the information set A which maximizes the code performance
(under SC decoding) for a speciﬁc channel condition. More
details on the problem of polar code construction is provided
in Section III.
Throughout this work, we use non-systematic polar en-
coding. However, it is straightforward to use the GenAlg to
construct systematic polar codes. In this work, a polar code
with codeword length N and k information bits is denoted by
P (N,k), i.e., the information set has the cardinality |A| = k
and the code rate Rc = k/N. In the following, we revise the
basic polar decoding algorithms.
SC decoding [1] is the ﬁrst polar decoder, where all
information bits ˆui are sequentially hard-decided based on
the previously estimated bits { ˆu1,..., ˆui−1} and the channel
information y, where i ∈{1,...,N}.
SCL decoding [2] denoted by SCL (L), utilizes a list of L
most likely paths during SC decoding; at every decision the
decoder branches into two paths ( ˆui = 0 and ˆui = 1) instead of
the hard decision in the SC decoder. To limit the exponential
growth of complexity, only the L most reliable paths are kept
sorted in the list according to a speciﬁc path metric.
CRC-aided SCL decoding [2] denoted by SCL+CRC-r (L),
where an additional high-rate CRC of r bits is concatenated to
the polar code, to help in selecting the ﬁnal codeword from the
L surviving candidates, yielding signiﬁcant performance gains
in competing with the state-of-the-art error correcting codes.
BP decoding [6] denoted by BP (Nit,max) is an iterative
message passing decoder based on the encoding graph of the
polar code. Log-likelihood ratio (LLR) messages are iteratively
passed along the encoding graph until reaching a maximum
number of iterations (Nit,max) or meeting an early stopping
condition. The error-rate performance of polar codes under BP
decoding is typically not competitive with SCL decoding. In
this work, we use the G-matrix-based early stopping condition,
where decoding terminates when ˆx = ˆu·GN [10].
III. POLAR CODE CONSTRUCTION
The polar code construction phase is about deciding the
most reliable k bit positions that are set as the information
bit positions, while the remaining N −k bit positions are
set as frozen bit positions. Thus, ranking the bit-channels
according to their reliabilities is of major signiﬁcance in the
polar code construction phase. The information set A is the
outcome from the polar code construction phase specifying
the indices of the information bit positions. A corresponding
logical A-vector can be used such that A = [a1,a2,...,aN],
where ai ∈{0,1} and 1 ≤i ≤N. Bit position i is frozen if
ai = 0, while bit position j is non-frozen (i.e., can be used for
information transmission) if aj = 1. For instance consider the
P (8,4)-code, the information set A = {4,6,7,8} can thus be
represented by the logical vector A = [00010111].
The code construction can be considered as an optimization
problem, where the objective is to ﬁnd the optimal set of k
good positions in a set of indices {1,...,N}, as shown in (1).
Aopt = arg min
A
BER(A) or BLER(A)
subject to
 
N
∑
i=1
ai
!
= k,
ai ∈{0,1}.
(1)
where A = [a1,a2,...,aN], Rc = k/N and i = 1,2,...,N.
The information set A (or, equivalently, the A-vector) is
channel dependent, meaning that it depends on the respective
channel parameter (e.g., design SNR for additive white Gaus-
sian noise (AWGN) channel, or design ε for Binary Erasure
Channel (BEC)). Thus, polar codes are non-universal. The
minimum distance of polar codes dmin depends on the polar
code construction (i.e., A). Polar codes dmin is equal to the
minimum weight of the rows {ri} in the GN-matrix with
indices in A (i.e., i ∈A) [11, Lemma 3].
Choosing the best k bit positions for information trans-
mission is even more crucial for short length polar codes.
This can be attributed to the fact that the bit-channels of
the short length polar codes are not fully polarized, and
the portion of semi-polarized bit-channels (which would be
normally unfrozen) leads to high error-rates. Although efﬁcient
polar code construction only exists for the BEC case [1],
many algorithms were devised for the AWGN channel case.
A survey on the effect of the design SNR and the effect of the
speciﬁc polar code construction algorithm used on the error-
rate performance of SC decoding is presented in [12].
Arıkan uses the symmetric capacity I(Wi) or the Bhat-
tacharyya parameter Z(Wi) of the virtual channel Wi to assess
its reliability [1]. However, the Bhattacharyya parameters are
preferred because of being connected with an explicit bound
on the block error rate (BLER) under SC decoding.
In [13], the polar code construction step is viewed as
an instance of density evolution and, thus, a construction
algorithm based on convolutions was proposed. A Gaussian
approximation of the density evolution for polar code con-
struction was proposed in [14].
In [11], picking the frozen bit positions according to the
Reed–Muller (RM) rule was observed to enhance the error-rate
performance signiﬁcantly under maximum a posteriori (MAP)
decoding due to the fact that the RM rule maximizes the

minimum distance dmin. An RM code can be viewed as a polar
code with a different frozen/non-frozen bit selection strategy
[11], where both codes are based on the same polarization
matrix GN. However, the k information bit positions of RM
codes are the positions corresponding to the k row indices
with the maximum weights in the GN-matrix. Consequently,
the RM code construction phase is channel independent as it
merely depends on the row weights of GN. A hybrid polar
and RM code construction [15] results in signiﬁcant error-rate
improvement gains under SCL decoding without the CRC-aid,
by improving the minimum distance of the resultant code. This
underlines the beneﬁts of improving the minimum distance of
the code and also the need of an improved construction algo-
rithm tailored to the decoder. A similar family of codes was
introduced in [16] providing signiﬁcant error-rate performance
gains under BP and SCL decoding.
In [17], an LLR-based polar code construction is proposed,
in which the LLRs of the non-frozen bits are tracked during
BP decoding to identify weak information bit-channels, and
then the information set A is modiﬁed by swapping these
weak information bit-channels with strong frozen bit-channels.
The resulting code shows an enhanced error-rate performance
under both BP and SCL decoding due to the resultant reduction
in the number of low weight codewords. Some work has
been done to construct polar codes which are tailored to a
speciﬁc decoder, e.g., polar code construction assuming SCL
decoding [18] and BP decoding [19], where a Monte-Carlo-
based construction is proposed similar to [1].
As the output alphabet size grows exponentially with the
codelength, it is computationally of high complexity to pre-
cisely calculate I(Wi) or Z(Wi) per bit-channel. However, a
quantization can be used to closely approximate them [20].
A recent discovery which reduces the complexity of the polar
code design is the partial order for synthesized channels [21].
Later an heuristic closed-form algorithm called polarization
weight (PW) [22] was proposed to determine the reliability of
bit-channels based on their indices and a carefully chosen pa-
rameter β [23], resulting in a signiﬁcant complexity reduction
in the polar code construction.
It is important to keep in mind that polar codes that are con-
structed based on the mutual information or the Bhattacharyya
parameters of the bit-channels, as proposed by Arıkan, are
tailored to hard-output SC decoders. Therefore, they are not
necessarily optimum when using other decoders such as the
soft-output BP decoder [11], [16], [17] or the SCL decoder
[16], [17], [24]. To the best of our knowledge, no analytical
polar code construction rule exists thus far which would be
optimized for BP or SCL decoding and, thus, the nature of
the iterative or list decoding is not usually taken into account
while designing polar codes. Therefore, the problem of taking
the type of decoding into consideration while constructing
the polar code is, thus far, an open problem. In this work,
we propose a method which always converges to a “good
enough” solution, i.e., leads to a better error-rate performance
when compared to the state-of-the-art polar code construction
techniques.
IV. GENETIC ALGORITHM-BASED POLAR CODE
CONSTRUCTION
GenAlg was ﬁrst introduced by Holland in 1975 [25] as an
efﬁcient tool that helps in achieving (good) solutions for high-
dimensional optimization problems which are computation-
ally intractable. Beside ﬁnding (good) local minima, a well-
parametrized GenAlg is known for converging to these minima
very quickly [26]. Due to that merit, GenAlg has attracted a
lot of research in the Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) ﬁeld leading
to improved and adaptive variants of it.
Furthermore, researchers from other ﬁelds (e.g., channel
coding, signal processing) worked on adapting the GenAlg to
some of their speciﬁc problems that lacked enough theoretical
basis for solving, leading to improvements over the exis-
tent theoretical methods of approaching the same problems.
GenAlg was applied in the channel coding ﬁeld, e.g., during
code construction [26], [27] and while decoding of linear block
codes [28], LDPC codes [29] and convolutional codes [30].
The GenAlg is inspired by the natural evolution where popu-
lations of offsprings, resulting from parents, keep evolving and
compete, while only the ﬁttest offsprings survive. Therefore,
the GenAlg starts with an initial population of individuals and
the ﬁttest of them survive and give birth to new offsprings
which represent the new population. The criterion of ﬁtness
is, therefore, critical for the GenAlg so that the offsprings keep
evolving towards the ﬁttest. If the size of population and the
number of evolution stages are sufﬁciently large, the GenAlg
converges to an ultimate (sub-) optimal solution.
The task of polar code construction can be viewed as an
optimization problem (see (1)) searching for the optimum
information set A that has the minimum (possible) cost
function. This optimization problem can be solved using
GenAlg. The bit error rate (BER) has been selected as the cost
function throughout this work for optimization conducted on
AWGN channels. All presented results throughout this work
are simulated on GPUs to accelerate our error-rate simulations
[31]. The whole setup is depicted in Fig. 1. Next we brieﬂy
introduce the most important GenAlg fundamentals.
A. Population
In this work, the population P = {Ai}, for i = 1,...,S, is a
collection of S candidate information sets represented by their
binary A-vectors, each with its own ﬁtness value (e.g., BER
or BLER), that represent the search space.
B. Initialization
As it turns out, GenAlg converges faster, and probably to
a better solution, if its population Pinit is initialized with a
sufﬁciently good collection of estimated A-vectors. For that
purpose, the population is initially ﬁlled with a collection of
A-vectors, all based on the Bhattacharyya construction [1]
obtained for BECs with various erasure probabilities. Besides,
we considered having the A-vectors constructed according to
[15] among the initial population, in the SCL-tailored polar
code construction phase, which improved the acquired solution
AGenAlg remarkably.

BERs = ComputeBERs
 Pi,SNRGenAlg

Initialize
Population
Rc
N
SNRGenAlg
Pinit
Polar Encoder
(Systematic or
Non-systematic)
Source
u
Channel
(e.g.,
AWGN,
Rayleigh)
x
Polar Decoder
(e.g., BP, SCL)
y
Pi
Compare
ˆu
u
Update Population
(selection, mutation,
crossover)
BERs
Pi
i < Npop,max?
Pi+1
yes
Pi+1
PNpop,max
Select
ﬁttest A
Terminate
no
AGenAlg
Fig. 1: An abstract view of the genetic algorithm (GenAlg)-based
polar code construction.
C. Fitness function
The cost function chosen in this work is the error-rate at
a user-deﬁned design SNR
 SNRGenAlg

. The ﬁtness function
that decides the rank of each of the individual A-vectors is,
thus, selected to be the inverse of the error-rate. In other words,
the A leading to the minimum error-rate is announced to be
the optimum AGenAlg. Alternatively, one might consider using
mutual information, LLR-reliability ∑N
i=1 |LLRi| or any other
reasonable metric as the ﬁtness function.
D. Mutation
Mutation guarantees more diversity and acts against pre-
mature convergence at a certain bit position. It is, straight-
forwardly, a bit ﬂip of a random position in the A-vector
representing a frozen-to-non-frozen (or a non-frozen-to-frozen)
switch at that respective bit position. A mutation example is
shown in Fig. 2a, where the offspring vector Y is the result
of bit ﬂipping the 2nd bit of the parent vector X. However,
the polar code construction problem has the constraint that
the number of non-frozen bit positions (i.e., number of ones)
is equal to k to maintain the code rate Rc = k/N. To restore
Rc, one further mutation is applied to the resultant offspring
vector Y yielding the vector Z. For our speciﬁc problem, one
mutation always occurs for each parent per evolutionary step.
E. Crossover
The crossover applied throughout this work is a single
midpoint crossover (see Fig. 2b), where the 1st half of the ﬁrst
parent vector X is combined with the 2nd half of the second
parent vector W to generate the vector Y. This often leads to
a change in the number of ones in the resulting vector Y (i.e.,
remember from (1) that the total number of ones in the A-
vector should be equal to k and thus the code rate Rc = k/N).
To restore Rc, sequential mutations are applied to the resultant
vector until reaching the k ones in the binary A-vector (Z in
00010111
X
m
Mutation
01010111
Y
Adjust rate
01000111
Z
(a) Mutation
00010111
X
00001111
W
C
Crossover
00011111
Y
Adjust rate
00011101
Z
(b) Crossover
Fig. 2: Examples of GenAlg’s evolutionary transformations in the
polar code construction context. Inputs (X and/or W) and output (Z)
satisfy the constraints in (1).
Fig. 2b). Similar to mutation, one crossover always occurs for
each pair of parents per evolutionary step.
F. Selection and population update
In this context, by the term selection we mean the way the
new population is generated. We applied the following scheme
in order to generate the new population:
• The ﬁttest T A-vectors are always pushed forward as
members of the new population (i.e., self-offsprings).
This ensures convergence to the (local) optimum and
guarantees a monotonic behaviour of the cost function
through evolving populations which facilitates observing
the candidate solutions.
• Crossovers are applied between each pair of the ﬁttest T
A-vectors, resulting in new
 T
2

offsprings.
• Mutations are applied on the ﬁttest T A-vectors, resulting
in new T mutated offsprings.
Consequently, the size of the new population S is
S =
T
|{z}
T fittest
+
T
2

| {z }
crossover
+
T
|{z}
mutation
= T 2 +3T
2
For all simulation results using the GenAlg as discussed next,
we set S = 20 and T = 5. We make the source code public
and also provide the best polar code designs from this work
online1.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS OVER AWGN CHANNEL
In this section, we show the results of designing polar codes
using the GenAlg method over the AWGN channel. To be
coherent with the results shown in [2], we use codes of length
N = 2048 and code rate Rc = 0.5.
A. BP decoder
We use the GenAlg to design polar codes tailored to
BP decoding over AWGN channel. Fig. 3 shows a BER
comparison between a code constructed via [20] at a de-
sign SNR (Eb/N0) = 2dB and a code constructed using
our proposed GenAlg at SNRGenAlg (Eb/N0) = 2dB under
BP (Nit,max = 200) decoding. The GenAlg-based construction
1https://github.com/AhmedElkelesh/Genetic-Algorithm-based-Polar-Code-
Construction

1
1.4
1.8
2.2
2.6
3
10−2
10−4
10−6
Eb/N0 [dB]
BER
Decoder

BP (Nit,max = 200)

BP (Nit,max = 200)

SCL (L = 32)

Fig. 3: BER of the GenAlg-based P(2048,1024)-code under BP
decoding over the AWGN channel.
yields a 0.5dB net coding gain at BER of 10−4 when compared
to the construction proposed in [20], while the only difference
between the two codes is the selection of the frozen/non-frozen
bit positions, i.e., both use exactly the same decoder.
The dmin of the BP-tailored polar code using GenAlg was
found to be 8, while the dmin of the polar code constructed
via [20] is 16. This is due to the fact that the performance
of a linear code under iterative decoding is dominated by the
structure of the stopping sets in the Tanner graph of the code
and not its dmin [32]. Thus, dmin is not the only parameter to be
maximized in order to design linear codes tailored to iterative
decoding. A fact supporting this claim is that the RM code
has a larger (maximum) dmin but worse error-rate performance
under iterative decoding when compared to polar codes [6].
Note that the BER performance of the BP-tailored polar
code is very close to the performance of a polar code con-
structed via [20] under SCL (L = 32), see Fig. 3.
B. SCL decoder
Next, the GenAlg is applied to construct polar codes tailored
to SCL (L = 32) over the AWGN channel. Fig. 4 shows a
BER comparison between a code constructed via the method
proposed in [20] at Eb/N0 = 2dB and a code constructed using
our proposed GenAlg at Eb/N0 = 2dB under SCL (L = 32)
decoding. The GenAlg-based construction shows signiﬁcant
performance improvements, yielding a 1dB net coding gain at
BER of 10−6 when compared to the construction proposed in
[20], where again the only difference between the two codes
is the frozen/non-frozen bit positions.
The GenAlg-optimized polar code without CRC-aid under
SCL decoding performs equally well as the CRC-aided polar
code under CRC-aided SCL decoding, with the same list size
L = 32 and the same code rate Rc = 0.5.
The dmin of the SCL-tailored polar code using GenAlg is
16 which is exactly the same as the dmin of the polar code
constructed via [20]. However, the RM-Polar code has a dmin =
32. Thus, again dmin is not the only parameter to be maximized
in order to design polar codes tailored to SCL decoding. Note
that only maximizing dmin will lead to an RM code.
1
1.4
1.8
2.2
2.6
3
10−2
10−4
10−6
Eb/N0 [dB]
BER
Decoder

SCL (L = 32)

SCL (L = 32)

SCL (L = 32)

SCL+CRC-16 (L = 32)

Fig. 4: BER of the GenAlg-based P(2048,1024)-code under SCL
decoding over the AWGN channel. The CRC-aided polar code is a
P(2048,1040)-code: N = 2048, k = 1024 and r = 16.
The distribution of frozen bit-channels over the N synthe-
sized virtual channels, shown in the “Frozen channel chart” in
Fig. 5, depends on the considered decoder while constructing
the code. The conventional construction techniques (e.g., [1],
[20]) assume that an SC decoder is used. Thus, these con-
struction techniques yield very similar A-vectors having a very
similar distribution as shown in Fig. 5a and 5b. Our proposed
GenAlg-based construction tailors the A-vector (or the code)
to a speciﬁc decoder (e.g., BP or SCL). The BP decoder has an
iterative (i.e., non-sequential) decoding nature when compared
to SC decoding. Thus, the A-vector tailored to BP decoding
has a much different frozen bit-channel distribution as shown
in Fig. 5c. Note that the A-vector tailored to BP decoding
contains a signiﬁcant number of non-frozen bits in the ﬁrst half
part of the code, which is not the case in the conventional code
construction algorithms assuming SC decoding. Similarly, the
GenAlg-based construction tailored to SCL decoding should
take the list decoding nature into consideration and, thus, a
different frozen bit-channel distribution as shown in Fig. 5d.
This shows that the GenAlg-based polar code construction
takes the decoding nature into consideration while constructing
the code, which is the main advantage of the GenAlg. Further-
more, Table I shows that the GenAlg-optimized A-vectors are
indeed tailored to the considered decoder.
TABLE I: Illustration of polar design and decoder architecture
mismatch by evaluating the minimum Eb/N0 required to achieve a
target BER of 10−4 for a P(2048,1024)-code over AWGN channel

Decoder
SC
BP (Nit,max = 200)
SCL (L = 32)

2.7 dB
2.45 dB
1.8 dB

2.65 dB
2.45 dB
2 dB

> 9 dB
2 dB
> 7 dB

> 6 dB
2.55 dB
1.65 dB
VI. CONCLUSION
As stated in [2], the best error-rate performance of ﬁnite
length polar codes (i.e., under ML decoding without CRC) is
not competitive with the other state-of-the-art coding schemes.
In this work, we focus on polar code construction (i.e.,

(a) Frozen channel chart based on Arıkan’s Bhattacharyya

2033
2048
1
16

2033
2048
1
16

2033
2048
1
16

2033
2048
1
16
Fig. 5: Frozen channel chart (i.e., frozen bit position pattern) of a
P(2048,1024)-code over the AWGN channel with different polar
code construction algorithms. The 2048 bit positions are plotted
over a 16 × 128 matrix and sorted with decreasing Bhattacharyya
parameter value. White: non-frozen; colored: frozen.
changing the code itself which is deﬁned by the A-vector)
in order to boost the error-rate performance under the state-
of-the-art feasible practical decoders (e.g., BP, SCL). We
propose a Genetic Algorithm-based polar code design where
the decoding nature is taken into account, yielding signiﬁcant
performance gains in terms of error-rate. For a polar code of
length 2048 and code rate 0.5 over the binary input AWGN
channel under plain SCL decoding, approximately a 1dB
coding gain at BER of 10−6 is achieved when compared to the
conventionally constructed polar codes. This enables achieving
the same error-rate performance of polar codes under state-of-
the-art CRC-aided SCL decoding with plain SCL decoding
without the aid of a CRC. Furthermore, GenAlg is used to
construct polar codes tailored to ﬂooding BP decoding, ﬁnally
closing the performance gap between conventional iterative
BP decoding and conventional SCL decoding. Fortunately, the
achieved gains come “for free”, since optimizing the A-vector
is done once and ofﬂine. The source code and the best polar
code designs from this work can be found in [33].
