Privacy-Friendly Peer-to-Peer Energy Trading: A
Game Theoretical Approach
Kamil Erdayandi∗, Amrit Paudel‡, Lucas Cordeiro∗and Mustafa A. Mustafa∗†
∗Department of Computer Science , The University of Manchester, UK
†imec-COSIC, KU Leuven, Belgium
‡The University of British Columbia, Canada

Abstract—In this paper, we propose a decentralized, privacy-
friendly energy trading platform (PFET) based on game the-
oretical approach – speciﬁcally Stackelberg competition. Unlike
existing trading schemes, PFET provides a competitive market in
which prices and demands are determined based on competition,
and computations are performed in a decentralized manner
which does not rely on trusted third parties. It uses homomorphic
encryption cryptosystem to encrypt sensitive information of
buyers and sellers such as sellers’ prices and buyers’ demands.
Buyers calculate total demand on particular seller using an
encrypted data and sensitive buyer proﬁle data is hidden from
sellers. Hence, privacy of both sellers and buyers is preserved.
Through privacy analysis and performance evaluation, we show
that PFET preserves users’ privacy in an efﬁcient manner.
Index Terms—Privacy, Game Theory, Peer-to-Peer Energy
Trading, Decentralized Approach
I. INTRODUCTION
Electricity generation is slowly transitioning to Renewable
Energy Sources (RES) such as wind and solar [1]. However,
this transition brings new challenges. RES are not stable
energy sources as their output ﬂuctuates based on weather
conditions [2]. This adds uncertainty to the generation side, in
addition to the uncertainty on the demand side, making balanc-
ing the grid more challenging and less efﬁcient. Unfortunately,
traditional electricity markets offering two-tier (peak and off-
peak) retail pricing for buyers and Feed-in-Tariffs (FiTs) for
sellers are not effective enough to deal with these uncertainties.
To address this issue, Peer-to-Peer (P2P) electricity trading
markets have been proposed [3]–[7]. They aim to incentivise
users to be more proactive by allowing them to trade electricity
between each other for more favourable prices than the retail
prices and FiTs. Hence, RES owners can collaboratively or
individually maximise their proﬁts and reduce their bills by
trading electricity directly with other users.
However, these trading markets require data sharing which
may pose threats to privacy of users [8], [9]. For example,
some entities may use other users’ offers and bids information
to infer who is selling or buying how much electricity and
when. In addition, prices offered by sellers can also reveal
This work was supported in part by the EPSRC through the projects
EnnCore EP/T026995/1 and SCorCH EP/V000497/1 and by the Flemish
Government through the FWO SBO project SNIPPET S007619. K.E is funded
by The Ministry of National Education, Republic of Turkey. M.A.M. is funded
by the DKO Fellowship awarded by The University of Manchester.
private data about energy usage pattern of seller prosumer.
Such data is closely correlated to users’ consumption patterns.
These situations may create privacy risks in which private
information of the users may be leaked [10].
In order to mitigate and alleviate these risks, use of various
techniques have been proposed [11]–[17]. Dimitriou et al. [11]
and Radi et al. [12] use anonymisation techniques to hide
users’ identity. However, these can be reversed by using tech-
niques described in [18]. A privacy-preserving prepayment-
based energy trading platform is proposed in [13]. However,
the proposed platform has a centralised structure and is vul-
nerable to single point of failure. Privacy preserving double
auction mechanisms are proposed in [14], [15] and [16],
which use Multi-Party Computation (MPC) and Homomorphic
Encryption (HE) schemes, respectively. Solely, only Xie at
al. [17] proposed a game theoretical trading mechanism based
on HE. However, the proposed market is not competitive. A
ﬁxed market price is determined by the buyers, and trading is
performed over this price. Cooperation techniques to leverage
better prices with group decisions are yet to be implemented.
To address these limitations, we propose a novel Privacy-
Friendly Electricity Trading (PFET) platform that provides
a competitive market for users based on a game-theoretical
approach (Stackelberg Game) while protecting users’ privacy
by deploying Homomorphic Encryption (HE) scheme. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst competitive game
theoretical approach in energy trading systems that utilises
HE and does not require TTPs. We implement and evaluate
the performance of PFET to demonstrate it’s effectiveness for
communities with different number of buyers and sellers.
Paper organisation: Design preliminaries are given in Sec-
tion II. Section III presents our PFET. Sections IV, V and VI
evaluate PFET in terms of equilibrium and time complexity,
privacy, and performance, respectively. Section VII concludes
the paper and gives directions for future work.
II. DESIGN PRELIMINARIES
A. System Model and Iterations
The P2P trading market used in our design consists of
sellers and buyers. It is modelled as a Stacklelberg game in
which sellers form a leader team, while buyers a follower team.
In the ﬁrst iteration, sellers make decisions and undertake
arXiv:2201.01810v2  [cs.GT]  29 May 2022

Fig. 1: System model and iterations.
strategies, and buyers follow them and respond back with their
own proposal and strategies. In the following iterations, sellers
update their strategies according to responses from buyers and
buyers update theirs accordingly until the market reaches to a
point where any further updates on strategies are not beneﬁcial.
In our case (see Fig. 1), in the ﬁrst iteration, sellers propose
selling prices for their excess electricity 1 . Buyers calculate
the total demand for each seller in accordance with the prices
offered 2 . Calculated demands for each seller are sent back
to sellers
3 , and sellers update their prices which respect
demands. Further iterations are performed on the same loop
until the equilibrium point is reached.
B. Thread Model and Assumptions
Buyers and sellers are honest-but-curious. They follow
protocol speciﬁcations, but may try to learn individual sellers’
or buyers’ sensitive data. External entities are not trustworthy.
They may try to eavesdrop data in transit or intercept and alter
the data. We assume that the entities communicate over secure
and authentic communication channels.
C. Privacy Requirements
• Seller price conﬁdentiality: Seller prices should be hidden
from buyers as prices can reveal sensitive data about
electricity consumption/production patterns of sellers.
• Buyer demand conﬁdentiality: The total demand of buyers
from a seller should be calculated in a privacy preserving
way such that buyers can calculate total demands without
revealing the individual demand information.
• Buyer proﬁle variables conﬁdentiality: Buyer-speciﬁc
sensitive proﬁle variables should be hidden from sellers.
III. PRIVACY PRESERVING ENERGY TRADING
In this section, we propose a novel energy trading algorithm
based on a competitive game theoretical approach that pre-
serves buyers’ and sellers’ privacy by deploying HE scheme.
A. Game Theoretical Energy Trading Algorithm
We propose a Stackelberg Game in line with Paudel et.
al. [3] in such a way that HE scheme can be deployed. Table I
lists the notations used in the paper.
In the proposed Stackelberg Game, the main purpose of
sellers is to maximise their revenues in a non-cooperative and
competitive way while buyers aim to maximise their utilities
when they buy certain amount of energy from the sellers.
TABLE I: Notations.
Symbol
Meaning
sj, bi
j-th seller, i-th buyer
NS, NB
Number of sellers, buyers
tk
kth trading period
πj, Sj
Price asked by sj, Supply that sj can provide
Dj, γj
Total demand on sj, State of sj
λi, θi
Proﬁle variables of bi, linked to prosumers’ behaviours.
Ui
Utility function of bi
WBJ
Welfare, utility of all buyers obtained from sj
W
Average welfare
Xji
Amount of electricity that bi wishes to buy from sj
PKs, SKs
Public, Private key pair of sellers
Evk
Evaluation Key
The system is initialised by the sellers (see Algorithm 1). For
each trading period, tk, new prices [π1, ..., πNS] are offered
by the sellers, e.g. sj. The prices are sent to buyers and, as
a response, demands proposed by the buyers for each seller
[D1, ..., DNS] are returned back to the sellers after evaluations
had been performed by buyer’s algorithm (Algorithm 2). With
the demand values returned, new prices are updated for each
sj by the difference between demand for sj and maximum
amount of electricity that sj can supply Sj. If the demand
is larger than supply, the price is increased, otherwise –
reduced. The difference is multiplied by a small constant η1
to prevent ﬂuctuations on price updates and to provide better
convergence to equilibrium. Updated prices are bounded by
ρsell < πt+1
j
< ρbuy where ρsell is FiT and ρbuy is retail price.
Sellers’ algorithm is run until demand and supply match.
Algorithm 1: Sellers’ Algorithm
Input: Number of Sellers, Buyers [NS, NB]
1
initialization;
2 for Time t do
3
Propose Prices [π1, π2, π3, ..., πNS];
4
do
5
[D1, D2, ..., DNS] ←Buyer′sAlgorithm(Prices);
6
for Each seller j do
7
πt+1
j
←πt
j + η1 × (Dt
j −Sj) ;
8
πt+1
j
←min(ρbuy, max(ρsell, πt+1
j
)) ;
9
end
10
while |Dj −Sj| > ϵ [For Each Seller j];
11 end
The utility function (1) of prosumers which is used to
quantify the level of satisfaction that the prosumer have when
it consumes certain amount of energy, is deﬁned as
u(xn) = λn × xn −θn
2 × xn
2
(1)
where xn is the amount of energy consumed by prosumer
n. λn and θn are the proﬁle variables of bn, characterising
prosumers’ behaviours.
The net utility (2), Ui of a buyer, bi, when it buys certain
amount of energy from seller, sj is obtained after subtraction
of cost of the energy, from the utility function.
Ui = u(xi) −πj × xi
(2)

In Buyer’s algorithm (Algorithm 2), ﬁrst of all, the amount
of energy that a buyer, bi, wishes to buy from sj, Xji, is
calculated. The aim of the buyer, bi is to maximise the utility
function, Ui in (2) w.r.t. price πj offered by the seller, sj. The
equation in line 4 of Algorithm 2 which is used to calculate
Xji maximising the Ui is obtained after taking derivative of
(2) and equating it to zero. After receiving the price πj offered
by seller, sj, each buyer, bj calculates Xji w.r.t. πj in ln. 4 of
Algorithm 2. Xji is inversely proportional to price offered by
sj. When the price is high, buyers wish to buy less energy and
vice versa. The minimum value for λi should be higher than
maximum retail price. However, it is in the buyer’s interest to
offer λi as low as possible, setting λi close to retail price. λi
is given a constant upper limit to guarantee convergence.
The Welfare function (3) of buyers, WBJ is deﬁned as the
accumulated utilities of all buyers obtained when they buy
electricity from sj. WBj is calculated in ln. 6 of Alg. 2.
WBj =
bi
X
Ui = 1
2
bi
X
θiX2
ji
(3)
Algorithm 2: Buyers’ Algorithm
1 Global Equilibrium States [γ1, γ2, γ3, ..., γNS];
Input : Prices [π1, π2, π3, ..., πNS]
Output: Demands [D1, D2, D3, ..., DNS]
2 for Each Seller j do
3
for Each Buyer i do
4
Xji = (λi −πj)/θi;
5
end
6
WBJ ←1
2 × Pbi θi × X2
ji ;
7 end
8 W ←Psj γj × WBJ ;
9 for Each seller j do
10
Dt
j ←γt
j × Pbi Xji ;
11
γt+1
j
←γt
j + η2 × γt
j × (WBJ −W) ;
12 end
State γt
j is the probability of bi choosing sj at time tk. In the
ﬁrst trading period t1, Global Equilibrium States [γ1, . . . , γNS]
are initialized with equal probabilities, i.e. γj = 1/NS. In the
following trading periods, latest calculated states are used until
the algorithm reaches an equilibrium point.
Average welfare is calculated in line 8 as the accumulation
of welfare of buyers multiplied by states. Total amount of
energy buyers wish to buy from sj is multiplied by probability
of seller γt
j to calculate demand on sj in line 10. Finally, states
are updated in line 11. If the welfare of buyers from sj, WBJ,
is higher than the average welfare W, then the probability of sj
being selected, γ1, is increased; otherwise – decreased by the
difference between WBJ and W. The difference is multiplied
by a small constant η2 to avoid ﬂuctuations on states.
B. Energy Trading Algorithm with Homomorphic Encryption
We propose a privacy-preserving version of the Game
Theoretical Energy Trading Algorithm, which uses Fully Ho-
momorphic Encryption (FHE) scheme. HE allows users to
perform computations on encrypted data without revealing
the plain data to anyone. Results obtained after computations,
when decrypted, is an identical output to that produced without
using any encryption scheme. We deploy FHE which permits
both addition and multiplication on encrypted data. There are
other options which can provide privacy for the proposed
system which are Differential Privacy and MPC. Differential
privacy adds noise to input data to provide privacy in which
accuracy of the data is lost in some degree. As we need
accurate output data for both prices and demands, we have
not considered differential privacy for our proposed trading
platform. In MPC, entities jointly compute a function over
their inputs without revealing actual data. However, the method
has high communication intensity, and due to this, MPC has
not been considered for our proposed platform having iterative
communication among the entities.
We represent the arithmetic operations on encrypted data
using FHE as follows: Eval(Evk, f, c1, ....cn), where Evk is
an evaluation key, f is an arithmetic operation and c1, ....cn
are variables. The operation f can be either multiplication
(MULT) or addition (ADD). Input variables can be either
encrypted or non-encrypted data.
As depicted in Fig. 2, ﬁrst of all, public/private key pair of
sellers, PKs/SKs, and Evaluation Key, Evk, are generated in
1. After this, trading period starts and prices are offered by the
sellers in 2. Global Equilibrium States [γ1, ..., γNS] are also
initialised in 2. Initialised prices and states are encrypted us-
ing PKs in 3. EP KS[prices], EP KS[states], PKS, Evk are
concatenated to msg1 and sent to buyers in 4 . The encrypted
amount of energy that bi wishes to buy from sj, E(Xji), is
calculated in 5. Before the calculation, buyer speciﬁc variables
λi and θ are encrypted using the PKs received from sellers.
E(Xji) is calculated for each sj and bi combination, so block
5 is run for NS x NB times. Encrypted demands E(Dj) are
calculated in 6 using E(Xj2), ..., E(XjNS ) and E(XjNS ) for
each seller, so block 6 runs for NS times.
After this, encrypted welfare of buyers when they buy
electricity from sj, E(WBj)s are calculated over previously
encrypted variables in 7 for each sj, so it is run NS times.
Encrypted average welfare E(W) is calculated using the pre-
viously calculated E(WBj)s in 8. States are updated E(γt+1
j
)
in encrypted format using E(W) and E(WBj) in 9 for each
seller, which means block 9 is run NS times. Updated states
in 9 and Encrypted demands in 6 are concatenated and sent
to the seller side in encrypted format in 10 .
After demands has been decyrpted in 11, new prices to be
offered by the sellers for the next iterations is calculated in 12
in non-encrypted format by the difference between demand Dj
and Sj. If the difference is low, such that |Dj −Sj| < ϵ, the
trading period terminates. Otherwise, updated states E(γt+1
j
)
obtained from 10 are decrypted in 13 and forwarded along
with updated prices πt+1
j
into 3 to be used in the next
iterations. The reason to send updated states from buyers to
sellers and decrypt, encrypt them on the seller side and return
them to buyers is to eliminate noise in encrypted states.

Fig. 2: Privacy-friendly Energy Trading platform.
IV. EQUILIBRIUM AND TIME COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS
Equilibrium analysis: Nash equilibrium (NE) exists in the
game if the following conditions are satisﬁed [19]: 1) player
set is ﬁnite, 2) strategy sets are bounded, convex and closed
and 3) utility functions are continuous and concave in the
strategy space. In our design, number of players which are
comprised of sellers and buyers in the player set is ﬁnite.
Sellers determine their strategies with prices they propose
and buyers determine their strategies with the amount of
energy that a buyer, bi, wishes to buy from sj, Xji. The prices
have upper and lower limit such that ρsell < πj < ρbuy. Xji
depends on πj, λi and θi which are either limited with upper
and lower bounds, or constants, which means Xji has upper
and lower limits. Therefore, strategy sets comprised of πj and
Xji are non-empty, closed, bounded and convex.
The aim of the buyers is to maximise Ui with strategies
determined by Xji. Second derivative of Ui w.r.t. Xji is given,
∂2Ui
∂x2
ji
= −θi < 0
(4)
so, Ui is strictly concave in Xji. Therefore, we can conclude
that there exists a NE. The analysis is valid for both algorithms
TABLE II: Computational cost for PFET per iteration.
Number of sellers, NS
10
20
30
40
50
Number of buyers, NB
10
20
30
40
50
Time Spent
7.8s
20.7s
39.3s
62.5s
89.7s
with HE and without HE as the same operations are performed
with same data in non-encrypted or encrypted format.
Time complexity analysis: In the Game Theoretical Energy
Trading algorithm proposed, Sellers’ Algorithm which act as
a leader of Stackelberg Game is the main function in which
Buyers’ Algorithm is called. Hence, time complexity is related
to the input of Sellers’ Algorithm: number of sellers and
buyers [NS, NB]. Double loop starting from ln. 2 in Algorithm
2 has a quadratic O(n2) time complexity. Ln. 10 in Algorithm
2 is quadratic due to loop and sum operation. Other parts have
either O(n) or O(1) complexity. As a result, time complexity of
the Game Theoretical Energy Trading algorithm is quadratic:
O(n2). Time complexity of algorithm with HE is O(n2) too,
as the blocks having highest time complexity in Fig. 2 are run
for NS x NB times.
V. SECURITY AND PRIVACY ANALYSIS
Seller price conﬁdentiality: Seller prices are encrypted with
the public key, PKS, before being sent to buyers. As sellers
are the only ones who have access to the corresponding private
key, SKS, buyers cannot see the prices of sellers.
Buyer demand conﬁdentiality: Total buyer demand per seller
is calculated on encrypted data which can only be decrypted
using the private key of sellers, hence only sellers can access
to these total demands.
Buyer proﬁle variables conﬁdentiality: Although, buyer
proﬁle variables are encrypted with PKS to be used for
calculations on the buyer side, only the result of computations
are sent to the sellers, not the individual buyer proﬁle variables.
Hence, sellers cannot trace back the buyer proﬁle variables.
VI. SIMULATION RESULTS
We implemented PFET using Python 3.8.5 programming
language. Pyfhel library [20] is used for FHE operations,
which uses Microsoft SEAL library [21] as a back-end. We
run simulations on a Laptop with the following parameters:

System Memory – 8GB. The following parameters are set for
the simulations: πmin = 4 cent (FiT), πmax = 20 cent (Retail
Price), η1 = 0.15 , η2 = 0.0001 and λi = 20.1, θi = 0.5.
Number of iterations to reach equilibrium depends on initial
supply values and prices offered by the sellers. When initial
supply values and/or prices are correlated with each other, the
number of iterations decrease. As an example, when the initial
offered prices of all sellers are replaced with 5 cents/kWh, the
number of iterations reduces to 10 for the setup in Fig. 3.
Also, the number of iterations can be adjusted with η1 such
that when η1 is set to higher values, number of iterations
decrease. η1 is set to ‘0.15’ in accordance to have low number
of iterations but also not cause ﬂuctuations for the proposed

Fig. 3: Simulation Results.
setup. η2 is set to a small number ‘0.0001’ to ﬁt high order
of welfare values to low order of states. It is in the buyer’s
interest to offer λi as low as possible, setting λi close to retail
price, so λi is set to ‘20.1’. Buyer speciﬁc parameter θi is set
to the same value 0.5 for each buyer for the sake of clarity.
We vary the total number of sellers and buyers from 20
to 100 and measure the total time our proposed solution takes
with and without HE in place. Average computational costs for
the energy trading algorithm with HE per each iteration are
presented in Table II. Average execution time per iteration with
HE almost ﬁt to the equation 2.85n2 +4.35n+0.1 where n is
correlated to the number of users (i.e. n = (NB + NS)/20).
This equation also conﬁrms that time complexity of the
algorithm is O(n2). The computation times of the algorithm
without HE are around ≈0.02s.
Simulation outputs of an example case with energy supplies
of sellers S = [12, 19, 20, 20, 20, 11, 19, 20, 16, 17] kW and
with initial prices π = [9, 17, 14, 19, 6, 8, 14, 17, 20, 11] cent
offered by sellers, are illustrated in Fig. 3. Buyers’ demands
reach to equilibrium points and match energy supplies of the
sellers. States values reach to equilibrium in the same way
buyers’ demands do. Prices starting from initially proposed
values also converge to an equilibrium point where ﬁnal prices
are between FiTs and retail price.
VII. CONCLUSION
We proposed a privacy preserving competitive energy trad-
ing platform, PFET, based on game theoretical approach
and fully homomorphic encryption scheme. The evaluation
results conﬁrm that PFET incentives both buyers and sellers
in terms of prices, demands and supplies match when the
system reaches an equilibrium point. Sellers’ sensitive data
is protected from buyers and vice versa. As a future work,
we plan to extend PFET by (i) considering network costs and
fees and (ii) investigating the trade off between utility-privacy-
performance when deploying diffrenet types of HE schemes.
