"Love is as Complex as Math": Metaphor Generation
System for Social Chatbot
Danning Zheng
University Of Rochester
Rochester, NY

Ruihua Song
Microsoft
Beijing

Tianran Hu
University Of Rochester
Rochester, NY

Hao Fu
Microsoft
Beijing

Jin Zhou
Beijing Film Academy
Beijing

ABSTRACT
As the wide adoption of intelligent chatbot in human daily
life, user demands for such systems evolve from basic task-
solving conversations to more casual and friend-like commu-
nication. To meet the user needs and build emotional bond
with users, it is essential for social chatbots to incorporate
more human-like and advanced linguistic features. In this
paper, we investigate the usage of a commonly used rhetor-
ical device by human – metaphor for social chatbot. Our
work first designs a metaphor generation framework, which
generates topic-aware and novel figurative sentences. By
embedding the framework into a chatbot system, we then
enables the chatbot to communicate with users using figura-
tive language. Human annotators validate the novelty and
properness of the generated metaphors. More importantly,
we evaluate the effects of employing metaphors in human-
chatbot conversations. Experiments indicate that our system
effectively arouses user interests in communicating with
our chatbot, resulting in significantly longer human-chatbot
conversations.
KEYWORDS
Metaphor Generation; Social Chatbot; User Experience
1
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, we have witnessed the emergence of a new
type of automatic conversational system – social chatbots,
such as SimSimi 1, Microsoft XiaoIce 2, and Replika 3. Differ-
ent from traditional task-oriented bots [12], social chatbots
are designed to "communicate" and build "emotional bonds"
with users [17]. Social chatbots bring users closer and better
engage them in human-computer conversations. As an illus-
trative example, Microsoft XiaoIce has been an extremely
popular social chatbot since it was released in 2014. XiaoIce
1https://www.simsimi.com
2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xiaoice
3https://replika.ai
Figure 1: Two examples of our social chatbot using
metaphors in conversation with users. (a) demonstrates a
one-round conversation in which the chatbot directly says
the whole metaphor sentence. (b) demonstrates a two-round
conversation in which the chatbot first says a novel compar-
ison to interact with user, followed by the explanation in the
second round.
has accumulated 660 million users worldwide and on average
users interact with XiaoIce 60 times a month4.
Meanwhile, the new purposes of social chatbots also intro-
duce new challenges: speaking more like a "virtual friend"
to users. Thus, social chatbots should be capable of han-
dling more casual and open-domain conversations. Although
much work has been done on chatbots [11, 12, 19], this work
has mostly focused on task-oriented chatbots and on mak-
ing chatbots talk "correctly" instead of "casually". To enrich
the expressions of social chatbots, a natural approach is to
4http://www.chinadaily.com.cn
arXiv:2001.00733v1  [cs.CL]  3 Jan 2020

Danning Zheng, Ruihua Song, Tianran Hu, Hao Fu, and Jin Zhou
introduce more human-like and advanced linguistic features.
Figurative language is frequently used in human communi-
cation [10]. Previous studies [5, 9] suggest that figurative
language such as metaphors and sarcasm are key to inter-
esting and engaging conversations. Furthermore, Roberts
et al. [16] examined the specific goals of people using fig-
urative language in conversations and reported that most
people view metaphors making conversations more interest-
ing. Therefore, in this work, we develop a new social chatbot
that conducts conversations with users using automatically
generated metaphors.
Our framework starts from a randomly selected target-
source pair, such as "love" and "math". The system then quan-
titatively finds proper connections between source and target.
For example, "(being) complex" is considered as a feature
shared by both "love" and "math". Based on the target-source
pair and the discovered connection, the framework generates
metaphorical sentences (e.g. "Love is as complex as math.")
We validated our system from two perspectives: 1) the quality
of generated metaphors in terms of properness and creativ-
ity; and, more importantly, 2) how do users react to these
metaphors in real human-computer conversations. For the
first evaluation, human annotators are asked to label the
quality of the generated metaphors. The results show that
our framework is capable of generating novel and proper
metaphors. Regarding the second evaluation, we study user
experiences with the generated metaphors. We focus on met-
rics including but not limited to friendliness (i.e., how much
the chatbot is speaking like a friend) and follow-up rate (i.e.,
the desire to respond to the chatbot). Test results indicate that
users are more interested and are significantly more willing
to respond when a chatbot uses metaphors. Metaphors also
marginally significantly increased the perceived friendliness
of chatbots.
The contributions of this study are threefold:
1) We propose an automatic metaphor generation system
for social chatbots. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first work that considers generating metaphors for conver-
sational systems.
2) We conduct user studies to evaluate the quality of gen-
erated metaphors. Results show that the system is able to
generate novel and proper metaphors.
3) We systematically evaluate the effect of using metaphors
in human-computer conversations. The results reveal that
metaphors make users feel more interested and more willing
to respond.
2
RELATED WORK
Metaphors (e.g., Love is like chocolates, sweet and bitter at
the same time) are a figure of speech involving the compari-
son of one thing with another thing of a different kind and
are used to make a description more emphatic or vivid [15].
Previous studies [5, 9] suggest that the use of figurative
language such as metaphors and sarcasm are important for
creating interesting and engaging conversations. Roberts
et al. [16] report that among all major figurative language
types, metaphors are most able to make conversations more
interesting. Specifically, 71% of participants indicated that
they use metaphor to add interest to conversations and 12%
use metaphors to get attention from their conversational
partner.
Early works [11, 12, 19] on human-computer conversa-
tion systems mainly focused on task-completion, such as
customer service, making recommendations and answering
questions. Researches on task-oriented systems are mainly
focusing on addressing users’ queries and generating infor-
mative answers. In recent years, more and more attention
has been paid to non-task-oriented chatbots [17], which aim
to hold casual and engaging conversations with users in open
domains. A number of studies [7, 8] have been done to meet
users’ emotional needs and make conversation systems more
engaging.
Despite the pervasiveness of figurative language in human
conversations, little attention has been paid on integrating
figurative language with chatbots. Inspired by Roberts et
al.’s study [16], we propose a metaphor generation system
that is capable of generating metaphors and enhancing users’
engagement with chatbot systems.
Target
Freq.
Parting
0.68%
Love
0.38%
Heart
0.21%
World
0.20%
Mother
0.16%
Beauty
0.12%
Man
0.11%
Dream
0.10%
Life
0.10%
Happiness
0.09%
Source
Freq.
Conc. R.
Food
0.92%
4.80
Signal
0.28%
3.86
Game
0.27%
4.50
Father
0.22%
4.52
Robot
0.21%
4.65
Wife
0.20%
4.13
Picture
0.17%
4.52
Brother
0.16%
4.43
Photos
0.16%
4.93
Phone
0.15%
4.86
Table 1: Top 10 most frequent abstract concepts and
concrete concepts in our chatbot conversation log.
Conc. R. is the abbreviation for concreteness rating.
3
METAPHOR GENERATION SYSTEM
Targets and Sources Selection
Previous cognitive linguistic studies show that target and
source are usually of different types of concepts: target are
usually from abstract domains, while sources from concrete
domains [10]. In other words, by utilizing metaphors, people
manage to explain and express less-understood and abstract

"Love is as Complex as Math": Metaphor Generation System for Social Chatbot
(a) Adjective
(b) Verb
(c) Noun
Figure 2: An illustration of the connecting words (in blue) for target love and source lottery (in red) by different part of speech
(POS) tags. Plots (a), (b), and (c) respectively show adjectives, verbs, and nouns in the underlying word vector space. Numbers
on the dotted lines represent the semantic distance (defined as 1 −cosine(·, ·)) between a pair of words.
concepts (i.e., targets) using well-understood and concrete
concepts (i.e., sources) [3]. Therefore, to select suitable tar-
gets and sources, we applied two different approaches in our
system.
To select targets, we first followed previous linguistic stud-
ies and collected 122 poetic themes [2, 4]. Please note that
poetic themes are usually abstract concepts, which makes
them ideal candidates for targets. We then extended the can-
didate set by adding the closest five concepts of each poetic
theme5. To ensure that the concepts are actually being used
in human-computer conversations, we further analyzed the
frequency of each concept in our chatbot conversation log.
We filtered out the concepts that are rarely used (frequency
lower than 0.001%) and obtained 96 concepts. These concepts
were used as target candidates in our system. These concepts
spanned many diverse topics, such as romance (e.g., "love",
"heart"), history (e.g., "war", "peace"), and nature (e.g., "earth",
"spring"). Table 1 shows the top ten most popular concepts,
as well as their frequencies.
To select sources, we considered two factors of a concept:
popularity in human-computer conversations and concrete-
ness. We first extracted the top 10,000 frequently used nouns
from our chatbot conversation log. We then learned the con-
creteness scores for these words from a concreteness data-
base introduced by Brysbaert et al [1]. The database assigns
concreteness ratings for 40 thousand English words, and the
ratings evaluate the degree to which the concept denoted by
a word refers to a perceptible entity [1]. We took the most
concrete 3,000 nouns as source candidates for our system.
Table 1 also shows the top ten most concrete concepts and
their scores.
5The closest concepts are extracted from a pre-trained word embedding
space learned from millions of social media (Weibo) posts
Discover Connections between Targets and Sources
Besides a target and a source, a metaphor also requires a
connection between these two concepts. The connection is
usually an expression, which is not only semantically close
to both the target and source, but also maintains a balanced
semantic distance to the two words [2]. In our framework, we
quantitatively discovered words linking targets and sources
semantically, and refer to these words as connecting words.
We first located targets and sources in a word embedding
space. Since the distance in the space represents the seman-
tic similarities of words [13], we can quantify how good a
word is in terms of connecting target and source from two
perspectives: 1) connectivity: the semantic distances from
a connecting word to target and source should be smaller
than the semantic distance between target and source; and
2) balance: a connecting word should maintain a balanced
distance to target and source, thus drawing the target and
source together. These two aspects can be clearly visualized
in Figure 2. For example, in Figure 2 (a), lucky is a connect-
ing word that demonstrates both connectivity and balance
between target love and source lottery. Therefore, combining
these two aspects, we designed a connecting score. Formally,
given a target T and a source V , the connecting score of a
word X for T and V is defined as:
connectinд(X |T,V ) = dist(T,X) + dist(V,X)+
loд(|dist(T,X) −dist(V,X)| + β)
(1)
The lower the connecting score, the better a word could
link the two concepts. For all the target-source pairs, we
ranked all words according to their connecting score in as-
cending order and choose the top 5 words as the connecting
words.

Danning Zheng, Ruihua Song, Tianran Hu, Hao Fu, and Jin Zhou
Figure 3: The properness score distribution of connecting
words by different POS categories. X-axis shows the proper-
ness scores, ranging from 0 (not proper) to 2.0 (very proper).
Y-axis shows the percentage.
Identify Similarities by Different POS
As connecting words should convey enough information, we
considered content words (i.e., adjectives, verbs, and nouns)
as candidates. Connecting words semantically links a tar-
get and a source, but connecting words of different part of
speech (POS) links the two concepts in different ways. We
summarize the most representative case in each category:
1) The connecting word is an adjective and it is a common
attribute or property shared by the target and the source. For
example, "complex" is a proper connecting word for target
"love" and source "math". 2) The connecting word is a verb
and it can modify both the target and the source. For exam-
ple, "scream" is a proper connecting word for target "soul"
and source "football fans". 3) The connecting word is a noun
and its relationship with the target is the same as its rela-
tionship with the source. For example, "gamble" is a proper
connecting word for target "love" and source "lottery".
We designed different methods for generating metaphor
from connecting words of different POS. Table 2 reports ex-
ample metaphors generated from (target, source, connecting
word) triplets, and also shows the POS tags of connecting
words. In the next three sections, we report our approach
for each of the three categories.
Generate Metaphors with ADJ Connecting Words
Ortony et al. [14] argue that metaphors project high-salience
properties of a descriptive source term (the source) onto a
target term (the target) for which those properties are not
already salient. In other words, a proper connecting word
for a target-source pair can be 1) used to describe the target,
and 2) a salient attribute of the source. Note that condition 2
is more restrictive than condition 1: both "sour" and "sweet"
can be used to describe apples, but only "sweet" is a salient
attribute. We validated adjective connecting words based on
these two conditions by checking if people have used the
adjective to describe the target and the source before.
Specifically, to validate condition 1, we send two queries
adjective T (e.g. "sweet love") and T is adjective (e.g. "love is
sweet") to a web search engine and recorded the total number
of returned web pages. Similarly, to validate condition 2, we
queried as adjective as (a|an) V (e.g. "as sweet as apples"), and
recorded the number of returned web pages. We considered
an adjective as proper if both conditions are satisfied, i.e.,
both numbers are larger than certain thresholds. To generate
complete metaphor sentences, we then manually constructed
a few templates: T is adjective, just like V., T is as adjective as
(a|an) V., and T is like (a|an) adjective V.
Generate Metaphors with Verb Connecting Words
A key observation is that verb and noun connecting words
tend to exhibit diverse relationships with targets and sources.
Therefore, we do not identify and handle all possible relation-
ships, but rather handle the most representative case: subject
and verb associations. Subject-verb is the most fundamental
sentence structure. It is also an effective feature in metaphor
detection [18] and metaphor generation [6]. Thus, to validate
whether a verb exhibits the same relation with a target and
source pair, we verified if target-verb and source-verb each
demonstrate subject-verb relations.
Starting from a verb connecting word and a pair of target
T and source V, we sent two queries verb + T and verb + V
to a search engine and retrieved the top 10,000 web snippets
for each query. After removing duplicates, we had 615.3 web
snippets on average for each keyword pair. We then filtered
invalid sentences (e.g., broken sentences, advertisements,
and sentences that don’t contain both keywords), which
resulted in 4.6 sentences on average for each keyword pair.
We analyzed the syntactic dependency structure of each
sentence and filtered out those sentences in which the target-
verb or source-verb relation was not subject-verb. We ranked
all sentences of targets by their semantic distance to the
source word, in which the distance was calculated as the
average distance of every word (excluding stopwords) in
the sentence to the source word. We used the sentence with
smallest distance as the explanation and generated T is like
V, [explanation]. metaphors.
Generate Metaphors with Noun Connecting Words
Similar to the verb case, noun connecting words exhibit di-
verse relations with targets and sources. Therefore, we iden-
tified and handled the most representative relation: subject-
predicate-object patterns. The idea is that if there exists a
certain predicate such that both target-predicate-noun and

"Love is as Complex as Math": Metaphor Generation System for Social Chatbot
(a) smoothness
(b) properness
(c) novelty
Figure 4: Plots (a), (b), and (c) respectively show the smoothness score, properness score, and novelty score distribution of
metaphor sentences by different categories of connecting words: adjective, verb, and noun.
source-predicate-noun frequently occur as subject-predicate-
object in a large text corpus, then we know predicate + noun
is a phrase that can modify both target and source.
We followed the same procedure to collect sentences for
targets and sources from the search engine and filtered the
sentences. On average, we collected 612.4 web snippets and
5.3 valid sentences for each keyword pair. We identified
subject-predicate-object structure in each sentence via de-
pendency parsing. We then followed the same approach to
generate T is like V, [explanation]. metaphors.
4
METAPHOR GENERATION SYSTEM
EVALUATION
Connecting Words Evaluation
From all 96×3000 pairs of target and source, we randomly
sampled 500 pairs and used equation (1) to retrieve the top
5 adjective connecting words, verb connecting words, and
noun connecting words, respectively. Each of the 500×15
samples was annotated on a 3-point scale: 0 (not proper), 1
(proper), and 2 (very proper). Each sample was labeled by 3
human judges, and its average was used as the final rating.
Figure 3 shows the properness score distribution of con-
necting words by different POS categories. If we consider a
connecting word with score >= 1 as proper, then overall we
have 1965 (26.2%) proper connecting words, consisting of 847
adjectives, 597 verbs, and 521 nouns. An important observa-
tion is that adjective connecting words achieve higher scores
than verb connecting words and verb connecting words
achieve higher scores than noun connecting words. This
result aligns with our previous analysis that verb and noun
connecting words exhibit more diverse relations with targets
and sources. In the next section, we evaluate the metaphors
generated using the 1965 proper connecting words.
Generated Metaphors Evaluation
Metaphor generation was evaluated with 1965 proper (target,
source, connecting word) triplets. We were able to generate a
total of 461 metaphor sentences: 351 with adjectives, 63 with
verbs, and 47 with nouns. The main reason for why there
were fewer metaphors with verbs and nouns than with ad-
jectives is that we only handled the subject-verb and subject-
predicate-object patterns, though other possible relations
exists.
Each generated sentence was evaluated by three human
annotators from the following perspectives: 1) smoothness: if
a sentence is clear and grammatically correct; 2) properness:
if the comparison and explanation are understandable and
make sense; and 3) novelty: if the comparison or explanation
is fresh, novel or surprising. Smoothness is a binary metric:
0 (not smooth) or 1 (smooth); properness and novelty are
annotated on a 3-point scale: 0 (not at all), 1 (moderately),
and 2 (very strongly). These three metrics reflect progressive
relationships, i.e., a metaphor cannot be proper unless the
sentence is clear, and the novelty score is only meaningful
if the comparison is proper. We use the average of three
annotators as the final score. Table 2 reports the assigned
scores of these three metrics for the example metaphors. A
sentence with a smoothness score ≥0.7 is considered clear,
and a metaphor with a properness score ≥1 is considered
proper. We generated 330, 45, 36 smooth sentences and 242,
29, 24 proper sentences with adjectives, verbs, and nouns,
respectively.
Figure 4 shows the score distribution of each metric by
different categories of connecting words. From plot (a) we
can see that 92.02% of metaphors generated with adjectives
are smooth while only 71.43% and 76.6% of the metaphors
generated with verbs and nouns, respectively, are smooth.

Danning Zheng, Ruihua Song, Tianran Hu, Hao Fu, and Jin Zhou
Generated Metaphor
Smooth
Proper
Novel
POS
Time is sweet, like a tangerine.
1.0
2.0
1.7
Adj.
时光很甜, 就像柑橘一样。
Love is like salary, has a goal and is not blind.
1.0
2.0
1.7
noun
爱情就像工资，都是有点目标的，不能盲目。
Relationship is like a park, needs to be operated and maintained.
1.0
2.0
1.0
verb
感情就像园区，需要经营和维护。
Loneliness is like an empty station.
1.0
1.3
0.7
Adj.
孤独就像空无一人的车站。
Soul is like a football fan, silently screaming.
0.7
1.0
1.0
verb
灵魂就像球迷一样，在无声地呐喊。
Marriage is like a guide, has its own set of rules.
0.7
1.0
0.0
noun
婚姻就像指南，有自己的一套法则。
Childhood is very cute, like a dolphin.
0.7
0.7
1.0
Adj.
童年很可爱，就像海豚一样。
Work is as outstanding as ballet.
0.7
0.0
0.0
Adj.
工作像芭蕾一样出色。
Life is like a stairway, has a direction, not confused.
0.3
0.0
0.0
noun
人生就像楼梯，有方向，再难不迷茫。
Time is like sportswear, will not fade, memory will shine.
0.0
0.0
0.0
verb
时光就像运动服，不会褪色，记忆也会发光。
Table 2: Examples of generated metaphors in decreasing order of the smoothness, properness, and novelty scores.
Targets (in red), sources (in orange), and connecting words (underlined) are highlighted.
This result is not surprising since the former approach ap-
plies a far more restrictive template than the latter two ap-
proaches. Plot (b) shows similar distributions for different
word categories. However, it is still worth noting that 20%
more metaphors generated with verbs are inappropriate as
compared to the metaphors generated with adjectives and
nouns. This is probably because subject+verb is a relatively
loose constraint. Finally, plot (c) reveals interesting differ-
ences in the distributions: the novelty distribution of adjec-
tive metaphors is evenly distributed between 1.00 and 2.00,
while the novelty distribution of noun metaphors is continu-
ously increasing from 1.00 to 2.00. There are 11.3% and 18.5%
more strongly novel metaphors (i.e., novelty score ≥2.0) with
verbs and nouns than with adjectives. This is because noun
and verb sentences are longer and tend to provide richer
explanations.
5
USER STUDY
Evaluation Metrics
Although several metrics have been proposed in previous
works to evaluate the performance of chatbots [11, 19], these
metrics are mostly designed for task-oriented conversations.
The main focuses of social chatbots, such as user experience
in casual conversations, are usually ignored in these existing
metrics. Therefore, we propose that one reasonable way
to evaluate social chatbots would be to align the metrics
with the goals of social chatbots: to build emotional bonds
with users and become their friend. Therefore, we designed
the following metrics to evaluate our system: (1) dialogue
quality: do users think that the chatbot generates meaningful
and informative content?; (2) friendliness: does the content
generated by the chatbot make users feel that the chatbot is
personable or engaging in the way a friend would?; (3) follow-
up rate: does the content generated by the chatbot make users
want to respond and keep the conversation going?
Experiment Design
Our data consists of 52 randomly sampled metaphor sen-
tences with properness score ≥1. We implemented two dif-
ferent approaches to integrate our metaphor generation sys-
tem into a chatbot. In the first approach, a chatbot directly
says the complete metaphor sentence, e.g., "Heart is shin-
ing like a diamond". In the second approach, a chatbot first
says a comparison, e.g. "I heard that heart is like a diamond.
Do you know why?", and then follows with the explana-
tion in the second round, e.g. "Because both are shining."
Both approaches were compared to the baseline where a
chatbot simply says the literal sentence, e.g., "Heart is shin-
ing." Therefore, for each metaphor sentence, we generated

"Love is as Complex as Math": Metaphor Generation System for Social Chatbot
three different types of expressions: one-round metaphor,
two-round metaphor, and literal sentence.
We recruited three annotators and assigned them to rate all
50 sentences for all three types of expressions. Each metric
was rated on a 5-point scale, from strongly disagree (-2)
to strongly agree (2). To deal with the dependency of our
within-subject experiment design, we first used a repeated
measures ANOVA to analyze the differences among group
means. We then performed Tukey post-hoc tests to compare
all the group means in pairs and reported the significances
of the pairwise differences.
Statistical Result
The results of our statistical tests are reported in Table 3.
There is a statistically significant effect of expressions on
dialogue quality and follow-up rate as determined by one-
way repeated measures ANOVA. There is also a marginally
significant difference in the friendliness score. The results
suggest that integrating metaphors with a conversation sys-
tem helps to attract users and makes conversations more
interesting. This result aligns with prior studies on human-
human conversations[9, 16].
A Tukey post hoc test revealed that dialog quality (p value
= 0.013) and follow-up rate (p value = 0.001) were signifi-
cantly higher when a chatbot directly stated the metaphor as
compared to a literal sentence. There was also a marginally
significant increase in friendliness score if a chatbot said
a metaphor instead of a literal sentence (p value = 0.09).
However, there were no statistically significant differences
between saying a metaphor in two-round conversations and
saying a literal expression for dialogue quality, friendliness,
and follow-up rate (p value = 0.36, 0.42, and 0.18, respec-
tively). One possible explanation is that user study subjects
might feel that two-round conversations are unnecessary.
Dialog. Q.
Friendliness
Follow R.
1-round metaphor
3.60 ± 0.75
3.55 ± 0.67
3.58 ± 0.70
2-round metaphor
3.45 ± 0.88
3.41 ± 0.80
3.40 ± 0.84
literal sentence
3.32 ± 0.84
3.34 ± 0.75
3.22 ± 0.80
F-statistic
F-value
3.719**
2.417*
6.280**
p-value
.031
.09
0.004
**p<.05, *p<.1
Table 3: Means and standard deviations of dialogue
quality, friendliness, and follow-up rate scores for
each type of expression in our user study. The F-
statistic from a repeated measures ANOVA is also
shown for each metric.
6
TESTING ON REAL CHATBOT USERS
To more robustly evaluate the effect of our system, we in-
tegrated metaphors with an existing social chatbot and an-
alyzed how different expressions affect real chatbot users’
follow-up rate. As users were unaware of the ongoing test,
we were able to eliminate any potential biases.
When integrating metaphors with social chatbot systems,
we sought to make the integration context-aware and fit
in the conversation flow, i.e., the metaphor is relevant to
the conversation topic and the metaphor matches users’ in-
put. For example, if a user is talking about their boyfriend
or girlfriend, a metaphor for love or marriage could be a
good fit in the conversation. We used question-answer rele-
vance, keyword matching, and topic similarity as input fea-
tures and trained a classifier to predict whether a metaphor
should be triggered. 6 When a metaphor was a good fit in the
conversation flow, we randomly triggered one of the three
expressions.
We tested our system on 924 users within a 3 week pe-
riod. Users’ follow-up rates are 22%, 27%, and 41% for literal
sentences, one-round metaphors, and two-round metaphors,
respectively. Overall, the results show that both metaphor ex-
pressions achieve more follow-ups than literal expressions.
Importantly, we found that the follow-up for two-round
metaphors was the highest among all three expressions,
which is contradictory to the findings from our user study.
One possible explanation is that in the user study, two-round
conversation might seem weird to annotators because there
is no conversation context, and thus annotators assign lower
scores. However, in real human-computer conversations,
users prefer more interaction with a chatbot. Sample dia-
logues are presented in Table 4.
7
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we propose computational approaches to gen-
erate metaphors and report the effect of our system in the
context of human-computer conversations. According to hu-
man evaluation results, our system is able to generate proper
and novel metaphors. User study evaluations show that peo-
ple feel that metaphorical expressions are more meaningful
and interesting as compared to literal expressions. More
importantly, integrating metaphors with an existing social
chatbot increased users’ follow-up rates.
There are many interesting and valuable directions for
future work, including studying how the properness and
novelty of metaphors affects users’ experiences and engage-
ment in human-computer interactions. In the meantime, it
will also be important to study possible improvements to our
6Details of this classifier are beyond the scope of this paper and were
omitted.

Danning Zheng, Ruihua Song, Tianran Hu, Hao Fu, and Jin Zhou
Speaker
Utterance
Chatbot
Tell me what is your favorite food?
(说说你喜欢吃的东西是什么啊？)
User
Beef (牛肉)
Chatbot
Only beef, without noodles?
(只要牛肉不要面？)
You know what, life is like chicken.
(你知道吗，生活就好比是鸡肉)
User
Why? (为什么？)
Chatbot
Mild. (清淡)
User
Chicken may not be mild. (鸡肉不清谈)
Chatbot
I am a cute girl. Believe it or not.
(我是萌妹纸，爱信不信)
User
You are a girl. (你是女孩子)
Chatbot
I am so cute and definitely not a boy.
(这么可爱一定不是男孩子)
A child is like a bowl. Do you know why?
(孩子就像碗，你猜为什么)
User
Because your are fragile.
(因为你一碰就碎)
Chatbot
Innocent. (干净)
User
You are like an unwashed bowl.
(你就像一个几天没洗的碗)
Table 4: Sample dialogues with two-round metaphors.
proposed metaphor generation model, such as enhancing
the percentage of proper metaphors.
