Reachability and Differential based Heuristics
for Solving Markov Decision Processes
Shoubhik Debnath1, Lantao Liu2, Gaurav Sukhatme1
Abstract The solution convergence of Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) can
be accelerated by prioritized sweeping of states ranked by their potential impacts to
other states. In this paper, we present new heuristics to speed up the solution conver-
gence of MDPs. First, we quantify the level of reachability of every state using the
Mean First Passage Time (MFPT) and show that such reachability characterization
very well assesses the importance of states which is used for effective state prior-
itization. Then, we introduce the notion of backup differentials as an extension to
the prioritized sweeping mechanism, in order to evaluate the impacts of states at an
even ﬁner scale. Finally, we extend the state prioritization to the temporal process,
where only partial sweeping can be performed during certain intermediate value it-
eration stages. To validate our design, we have performed numerical evaluations by
comparing the proposed new heuristics with corresponding classic baseline mech-
anisms. The evaluation results showed that our reachability based framework and
its differential variants have outperformed the state-of-the-art solutions in terms of
both practical runtime and number of iterations.
1 Introduction
Decision-making in uncertain environments is a basic problem in the area of arti-
ﬁcial intelligence [18, 19], and Markov decision processes (MDPs) have become
very popular for modeling non-deterministic planning problems with full observ-
ability [17, 22]. Speciﬁcally, an MDP assumes discrete states and discrete actions,
and can be viewed as stochastic automata where an agent’s actions have uncertain
effects. Such uncertain action outcomes induce stochastic transitions between states.
The expected value of a chosen action is a function of the transitions it induces. On
executing the action, the agent receives a reward and also causes a change in the
state of the environment. The objective of the agent is to perform actions in order to
maximize the cumulative future reward over a period of time. In practice, the Value
Iteration (VI) is probably the most famous and most widely used method for solving
the MDPs [5, 13].
We are interested in the exact solution methods and our objective is to further
accelerate the convergence of the MDPs’ solving mechanism. Different from many
1Shoubhik Debnath and Gaurav Sukhatme are with the Department of Computer Sci-

2Lantao Liu is with the Intelligent Systems Engineering Department at Indiana University, Bloom-

The paper was published in 2017 International Symposium on Robotics Research (ISRR).
1
arXiv:1901.00921v1  [cs.AI]  3 Jan 2019

2
S. Debnath, L. Liu, G.S. Sukhatme
popular state-space search based heuristics which essentially exploit MDP’s proba-
bilistic transition models and search for a path leading from the start state to the goal
state based on some search tree/graph structures, our method evaluates the global
feature of the entire state space and quantiﬁes the level of reachability of each states
using ﬁrst passage time information. This enables us to assess the relevance or im-
portance of states, built on which other completely new heuristics such as backup
differentials can be designed.
In greater detail, in this paper we introduce the notion of reachability landscape
which characterizes how hard it is for the agent to transit from any state to the given
goal state. To compute the reachability landscape, we use the Mean First Passage
Time (MFPT) which can be formulated into a simple linear system. We show that
such reachability characterization of each state reﬂects the importance of this state,
and thus provides a natural basis that can be used for prioritizing states for the stan-
dard value iteration process. With that, we also propose the differential backup based
heuristic where the potential impacts of states can be more accurately captured. In
addition, we extend the classic prioritized sweeping to the temporal process and re-
allocate the sweeping efforts during different stages, so that only partial sweeping
can be performed during certain intermediate value iteration stages and the conver-
gence performance can be further improved.
2 Related Work
The basic computational mechanisms and techniques for MDPs have been well-
understood and widely applied to solve many decision-theoretic planning [8, 20]
and reinforcement learning problems [10, 21]. Value iteration and policy iteration
are two of the most famous algorithms to solve the MDPs and particularly the value
iteration might be the most widely used mechanism due to its easy implementation
and fast convergence [5, 13].
One of the most widely-used frameworks for speeding up the convergence is a
rich class of heuristics based on state-space search [4, 12]. Such heuristics usually
take advantage of MDPs’ probabilistic transition models directly, and use a tree or
graph structure to search for a solution in the form of a sequence of actions, lead-
ing to a path from the start state to a goal state. For instance, the most well known
method in this category is probably the real-time dynamic programming (RTDP) [4]
where states are not treated uniformly. In each DP iteration of the RTDP, only a sub-
set of most important states might be explored, and the selection of the subset of
states are usually built on, and related to, the agent’s exploration experience. For a
single backup iteration, the RTDP typically requires less computation time in com-
parison to the classic DP where all states need to be swept, and thus can be ex-
tended as an online process and integrated into the real-time reinforcement learning
framework [6]. Similar strategies also include the state abstraction [2, 15], where
states with similar characteristics are hierarchically and/or adaptively grouped to-
gether, either in ofﬂine static or online dynamic aggregation style. Different from
all these methods, the proposed framework is not based on state-space search, in-

Reachability and Differential based Heuristics for Solving MDPs
3
stead it characterizes the entire state space into a reachability landscape using the
MFPT information.
Another important heuristic for efﬁciently solving MDPs is the prioritized sweep-
ing [16], which has been broadly employed to further speed up the value iteration
process. This heuristic evaluates each state and obtains a score based on the state’s
contribution to the convergence, and then prioritizes/sorts all states based on their
scores (e.g., those states with larger difference in value between two consecutive
iterations will get higher scores) [1, 23]. Then in the immediately next dynamic pro-
gramming iteration, evaluating the states follows the newly prioritized order. The
prioritized sweeping heuristic is also leveraged in our MFPT based value iteration
procedure, and comparisons with baseline approaches have been conducted in our
experimental section.
The reachability of state space has been investigated in existing works. For exam-
ple, the structured reachability analysis [7] of MDPs has been proposed to evaluate
whether a state is reachable or not, so that one can restrict the dynamic programming
to only reachable states, reducing the computational burden of solving an MDP.
Note, the reachability in that work is deﬁned as a binary state, and if a state is even-
tually reachable from a given starting state, then it is deﬁned as reachable, otherwise
it is unreachable. This is different from our reachability landscape where each state’s
reachability is measured with a real-valued number.
Important related frameworks for solving MDPs also include compact represen-
tations such as linear function representation and approximation [13, 17] used in
the policy iteration algorithms. The linear equation based techniques do not exploit
regions of uniformity in value functions associated with states, but rather a compact
form of state features that can somewhat reﬂect values [9]. Our method for comput-
ing the MFPT can also be formulated into a linear system. However, the intermediate
results generated from MFPT are more direct: the produced reachability landscape
represented by a “grid map” very well capture – and also allow us to visualize – the
relevance or importance of states, and can lead to a faster convergence speed which
is demonstrated in the experiments.
3 Preliminaries
3.1 Markov Decision Processes
Deﬁnition 1. An Markov Decision Process (MDP) is a tuple M = (S,A,T,R), where
• S = {s1,··· ,sn} is a set of states;
• A = {a1,··· ,an} is a set of actions;
• T : S × A × S →[0,1] is a state transition function such that Ta(s1,s2) is the
probability that action a in state s1 will lead to state s2;
• R : S×A →R is a reward function where Ra(s,s′) returns the immediate reward
received on taking action a in state s that will lead to state s′.
If every non-terminal state can eventually enter a terminal state such as a
goal/destination state, then such a Markov system is absorbing by nature [9]. In

4
S. Debnath, L. Liu, G.S. Sukhatme
this work, we restrict our attention to absorbing Markov systems so that the agent
can arrive and stop at a goal.
A policy is of the form π = {s1 →a1,s2 →a2,··· ,sn →an}. We denote π[s]
as the action associated to state s. If the policy of a MDP is ﬁxed, then the MDP
behaves as a Markov chain [14].
3.1.1 Value Iteration
The Value Iteration (VI) is probably the most widely employed approach to solve
MDPs. It is an iterative procedure that calculates the value (or utility in some litera-
ture) of each state based on the values of the neighbouring states until it converges.
The value V(s) of a state s at each iteration can be calculated by the Bellman equa-
tion shown below
V(s) = max
a∈A ∑
s′∈S
Ta(s,s′)

Ra(s,s′)+γV(s′)

,
(1)
where γ is a reward discounting parameter. The stopping criteria for the algorithm
is when the values calculated on two consecutive iterations are close enough, i.e.,
maxs∈S |V(s) −V ′(s)| ≤ε, where ε is an optimization tolerance/threshold value,
which determines the level of convergence accuracy. We call one such iterative up-
date a Bellman backup.
3.1.2 Prioritized Sweeping
The standard Bellman backup evaluates values of all states in a sweeping style, fol-
lowing the index of the states stored in the memory. To speed up the convergence, a
heuristic called prioritized sweeping has been proposed and widely used as a bench-
mark framework for non-domain-speciﬁc applications. The algorithm labels states
as more “relevant” or more “important” during a particular iteration, if the change
in the state value is higher when compared to its previous iteration. The essential
idea is that, the larger the value changes, the higher impact that updating that state
will change its dependent states, thereby taking a larger step towards convergence.
Alg. 1 shows how the value iteration proceeds in prioritized sweeping (VI-PS).
3.2 Mean First Passage Times
Starting from state si, the number of state transitions involved in reaching states sj
for the ﬁrst time is referred as ﬁrst passage time (FPT), Tij. The mean ﬁrst passage
time (MFPT), µi j from state si to sj is the expected number of steps required to
transit from state si to an absorbing state sj [3]. The MFPT analysis is built on the
Markov chain and give us information about the short range behavior of the chain.
Moreover, it has nothing to do with the agent’s actions. Remember that, when an
MDP is associated to a policy, it then behaves as a Markov chain [14].
Formally, let us deﬁne a Markov chain with n states and transition probability
matrix, p ∈IRn,n where pik represents the transition probability from state si to sk.

Reachability and Differential based Heuristics for Solving MDPs
5
Algorithm 1: Prioritized Sweeping (VI-PS)
1 Initialize a priority queue, PQ as empty
2 s := state with change δ in V(s)
3 Insert s into PQ
4 while PQ is not empty do
5
s := pop highest priority entry from PQ
6
Update V(s) as per Bellman backup
7
foreach predecessor state s′ of s do
8
Calculate change δ ′ in V(s′)
9
if δ ′ ≥threshold then
10
priority of s′ := max (current priority, maxa(δ ·Ta(s′,s))
11
Insert or update PQ with s′ and the calculated priority
If the transition probability matrix is regular, then we can refer each MFPT, µij =
E(Ti j). Given, Bk is an event where the ﬁrst state transition happens from state si to
sk, MFPT satisﬁes the below conditional expectation formula:
E(Tij) = ∑
k
E(Tij|Bk)pik
(2)
From the deﬁnition of mean ﬁrst passage times, we have, E(Tij|Bk) = 1+E(Tk j).
So, we can rewrite Eq. (2) as follows.
E(Tij) = ∑
k
pik + ∑
k̸=j
E(Tk j)pik
(3)
Since, ∑k pik = 1, Eq. (3) can be formulated as per the below equation:
µij = 1+ ∑
k̸=j
pik ∗µk j
(4)
Eq. (4) can be rewritten as:
∑
k̸=j
pik ∗µk j −µij = −1,
(5)
Solving all MFPT variables can be viewed as solving a system of linear equations






p11 −1
p12
.. ..
p1n
p21
p22 −1 .. ..
p2n
..
..
.. ..
..
..
..
.. ..
..
pn1
pn2
.. .. pnn −1












µ1j
µ2j
..
..
µnj






=






−1
−1
..
..
−1






.
(6)

6
S. Debnath, L. Liu, G.S. Sukhatme
(a)
(b)
Fig. 1 Illustration of reachability landscape. (a) Demonstration of a simple simulation scenario
with dark blocks as obstacles, and the goal state as a red circle; (b) Final reachability landscape
corresponding to the converged MDP.
The values µ1j, µ2j, ...., µn j represent the MFPTs calculated for state transitions
from states s1, s2, ...., sn to sj. To solve above equation, efﬁcient decomposition
methods [11] may help to avoid a direct matrix inversion.
4 Reachability and Differential based Solution
Our objective is to accelerate the convergence process of solving an MDP and we
propose a reachability and differential based solution. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst quantify
the level of reachability of every state using the Mean First Passage Time (MFPT);
then, we introduce the notion of backup differential as an extension to capture the
state’s potential impact to other states at an even ﬁner level. Finally, the reachabil-
ity and differential based mechanism is integrated with the temporally prioritized
partial-space sweeping heuristics.
4.1 Construction of Reachability Landscape
By “reachability of a state” we mean that based on current ﬁxed policy, how hard it
is for the agent to transit from this state to the given goal/absorbing state. A smaller
reachability value is deﬁned as more reachable. Thus, a state’s reachability in this
context is in fact a real-valued number instead of a binary value (reachable vs. un-
reachable), and for all states we can construct a reachability landscape, which can
be visualized as a grid map if the states have some spatial structure, see Fig. 1 for
an illustration.
Speciﬁcally, assume the goal state is sj, we use the MFPT value µij to quantify
the reachability from an arbitrary state si to the goal state sj. For all states, we can
then construct a reachability landscape represented as a surface. Fig. 1(b) shows
an example represented as heatmap in our simulated environment. The values in
the heatmap range from 0 (cold color) to 100 (warm color). Intuitively, one may
imagine the landscape to be an “energy surface” where the minimum energy state is
the most stabilized, and an agent situating at a non-minimum state will be unstable
and eventually moves towards to the minimum state, which is the absorbing state

Reachability and Differential based Heuristics for Solving MDPs
7
where the goal is located. It is worth mentioning that, in order to better analyze the
low MFPT spectrum that we are most interested, values in reachability landscape
may be “clipped”. For example, in Fig. 1(b) any value greater than 100 has been
clipped to 100.
We observe that the reachability conveys very useful information on potential
impacts to other states. More speciﬁcally, a state with a better reachability (smaller
MFPT value) is more likely to make a larger change during the MDP convergence
procedure, leading to a bigger convergence step.
4.2 Mean First Passage Time based Value Iteration (MFPT-VI)
The prioritized sweeping mechanism has further improved the convergence rate over
the classic Bellman backup by exploiting and ranking the states based on their poten-
tial contributions, where the metric is based on comparing the difference of values
for each state between two consecutive iterations.
We propose a new method called Mean First Passage Time based Value Iteration
(MFPT-VI) which is also built on the prioritized sweeping mechanism, but using a
different prioritizing metric. Formally, we propose to prioritize the states using the
reachability values, because as aforementioned, the reachability characterization of
each state reﬂects the potential impact/contribution of this state, and thus provides
a natural basis for prioritization. Our reachability based metric is distinct from the
existing value-difference metric as follows, the reachability landscape can very well
capture the degree of importance for all states from a global viewpoint, whereas the
classic value-difference strategy evaluates states locally, and may fail to grasp the
correct global “convergence direction” due to the local viewpoint.
Note that, since the MFPT computation is relatively expensive and it is particu-
larly good at capturing high-level feature, it is not necessary to compute the MFPT
at every iteration, but rather after every few iterations. It is also worth mentioning
that, if there are multiple goal/absorbing states, then each goal state will require to
compute its own MFPT landscape, and the ﬁnal reachability landscape will be nor-
malized across all obtained landscapes. The computational process of MFPT-VI is
pseudo-coded in Alg. 2.
4.3 A Heuristic using Backup Differentials
Since the reachability of a state implies how hard it is to reach the given goal state
from that state, and during the value iteration process the reachability landscape
is re-computed periodically representing a more reﬁned overview of the reachabil-
ity characterization, therefore the difference from the old landscape to an updated
version can indicate the “changing direction of the reachability” to some extent. In-
tuitively, a larger error (reduction of the reachability value) on a state implies more
signiﬁcant potential that this state can impact the convergence. Since the error is
the difference between two subsequent landscapes and it occurs during the Bellman
backup, we call such error computation a backup differential.

8
S. Debnath, L. Liu, G.S. Sukhatme
Algorithm 2: Mean First Passage Time based Value Iteration (MFPT-VI)
1 Given states S, actions A, transition probability Ta(s,s′) and reward Ra(s,s′). Assume goal
state s∗, calculate the optimal policy π
2 while true do
3
V = V ′
4
Calculate MFPT values µ1s∗, µ2s∗, ···, µ|S|s∗by solving the linear system as shown in
Eq. (6)
5
List L := Sorted states with increasing order of MFPT values
6
foreach state s in L do
7
Compute value update at each state s given policy π:
V ′(s) = maxa∈A ∑∀s′∈S Ta(s,s′)

Ra(s,s′)+γV(s′)

8
if maxsi |V(si)−V ′(si)| ≤ε then
9
break
We propose to extend the MFPT-VI to use the backup differential as a prioritizing
metric, and term this method D-MFPT-VI, where “D” means differential. Based on
above observation, the potential impact of a state can also be better captured by
the rate of error changes, which is essentially the higher order of differentials. For
example, the next order of the backup differential is D2-MFPT-VI, accounting for
the possible future trends of the error, based on its current rate of change. This is
analogous to the kinematics analysis of displacement, velocity and acceleration, etc.
Obviously, the standard VI-PS, that only measures the error between two itera-
tions is a special case of such differential framework. In addition to that, we also
implemented a one-order higher differential version of VI-PS and we refer it to as
D-VI-PS, and compared its performance with the reachability based variant of the
equivalent order of backup differential. The computational process of D-MFPT-VI
is pseudo-coded in Alg. 3.
4.4 Solving MDPs in Partial State Space
Until here, what we discussed are for prioritized sweeping in full state space, and our
experimental results in Section 5 will show that the proposed framework is superior
to the baseline popular methods. In this section, we show that by extending the
framework to partial space sweeping, the convergence rate can be further enhanced.
Our heuristics are based on the allocation of sweeping efforts. Speciﬁcally, the
prioritized sweeping mechanism has re-allocated the state sweeping from an arbi-
trary set to a sorted list, but such re-allocation is still limited to one iteration at a
particular time moment. Because the solving process involves many iterations (and
moments), we take advantage of the temporal process and re-allocate the sweep-
ing efforts during different temporal stages. In greater detail, as aforementioned, the
reachability characterization at earlier stages can only capture a big picture of the
problem and it begins to reﬁne local details in later phases, thus, at earlier value
iterations we opt to sweep a small subset of states of most impact, and gradually

Reachability and Differential based Heuristics for Solving MDPs
9
Algorithm 3: Differential Mean First Passage Time based Value Iteration (D-
MFPT-VI)
1 Given states S, actions A, transition probability Ta(s,s′) and reward Ra(s,s′). Assume goal
state s∗, calculate the optimal policy π
2 while true do
3
V = V ′
4
MFPTOld = Current MFPT values µ1s∗, µ2s∗, ···, µ|S|s∗
5
Calculate MFPT values µ1s∗, µ2s∗, ···, µ|S|s∗by solving the linear system as shown in
Eq. (6)
6
MFPTNew = Newly calculated MFPT values µ1s∗, µ2s∗, ···, µ|S|s∗
7
∆MFPT = MFPTNew - MFPTOld
8
List L := Sorted states with decreasing order of ∆MFPT values
9
foreach state s in L do
10
Compute value update at each state s given policy π:
V ′(s) = maxa∈A ∑∀s′∈S Ta(s,s′)

Ra(s,s′)+γV(s′)

11
if maxsi |V(si)−V ′(si)| ≤ε then
12
break
enlarge the sweeping set by including more states of smaller impact, until all states
are included in the later stages. One challenge here is how to divide the space from
the prioritized list. We provide two heuristics as follows:
1) The ﬁrst heuristic is to uniformly divide the prioritized states into sub-lists of
equal size (length). If the number of partitions is p, and the sweeping method is
D-MFPT-VI (for example), then each partitioned sub-list contains |S|/p states.
We refer to this heuristic as D-MFPT-VI-H1.
2) The second heuristic is to uniformly divide the “impact”, but in this way the
lengths of sub-lists can be non-uniform. Formally, given the number of partition
p and the errors obtained in D-MFPT-VI, and assume the maximum error (cor-
responding to largest impact) and minimum error (corresponding to smallest
impact) are emax and emin, respectively. Then the error range can be calculated
as r = emax - emin and we wish each partitioned sub-list to have an error range
of r
p. Consequently, for partitioning index i = 1,··· , p, a state with an error be-
tween emin + (i −1) ∗r/p and emin + i ∗r/p belongs to partition i. We refer to
this heuristic as D-MFPT-VI-H2.
4.5 Time Complexity Analysis
Each value iteration has a time complexity of O(|A||S|2) where |S| denotes the num-
ber of states and |A| represents the number of actions. Calculation of the MFPT
needs to solve a linear system that involves matrix inversion (the matrix decom-
position has a time complexity of O(|S|2.3) if state-of-the-art algorithms are em-
ployed [11], given that the size of matrix is the number of states |S|). Therefore,

10
S. Debnath, L. Liu, G.S. Sukhatme
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Fig. 2 (a) Demonstration of simulation environment, with the agent’s initial state (blue) and the
goal state (red). Grey blocks are obstacles; (b)-(e) Evolution of reachability landscapes; (f) Con-
verged optimal policy (red arrows) and a trajectory completed by the agent to reach the goal.
for each iteration, both the MFPT-VI and D-MFPT-VI algorithms have a time com-
plexity O(|A||S|2 +|S|2.3). However, experimental results show that our reachability
characterization based framework practically requires much fewer iterations to con-
verge.
5 Experimental Results
We validated our method through numerical evaluations with a simulator written in
C++ running on a Linux machine.
We consider the generic MDP problem where each action can lead to transitions
to all other states with certain transition probabilities. However, in many practical
scenarios, the probability of transiting from a state to another state that is “weakly
connected” can be small, even close to 0. This can potentially result in non-dense
transition matrix. For example, in the robotic motion planning scenario, the state
transition probability from state si to state sj can be correlated with the time or
distance of traveling from si to sj, and it is more likely for a state to transit to
some states within certain vicinity. To obtain the discrete MDP states, we tessellate
the agent’s workspace into a grid map, and represent the center of each grid as a
state. In this way, the state hopping between two states represents the corresponding
motion in the workspace. A demonstration is shown in Fig. 2. All experiments were
performed on a laptop computer with 8GB RAM and 2.6 GHz quad-core Intel i7
processor.

Reachability and Differential based Heuristics for Solving MDPs
11
(a)
(b)
Fig. 3 Time comparisons between the baseline methods and our proposed algorithms, with chang-
ing numbers of states (x-axis). (a) Variants of value iteration methods. (b) Backup differential
variants. The thick green curve in two ﬁgures is the result of MFPT-VI, which can be used as a
common baseline to compare.
5.1 Solution with Full Space Sweeping
To assess the advantages introduced by the MFPT reachability characterization, we
ﬁrst investigate the solution convergence using this method in the full state space,
by comparing with other popular full space sweeping mechanisms.
We start by comparing the practical runtime performance as it is the most basic
algorithmic evaluation metric. The time taken by VI, VI-PS and MFPT-VI algo-
rithms to converge to the optimal solution (with the same convergence error thresh-
old) are shown in Fig. 3(a). The results reveal that VI is the slowest amongst all the
three algorithms. Because of the prioritized sweeping heuristic, VI-PS is faster than
VI. It is obvious to see that our proposed MFPT-VI is much faster than the other
two methods. It is worth noting that in our implementation of MFPT-VI, the MFPT
component is computed every three iterations instead of every single iteration, be-
cause the the purpose of using MFPT is to characterize global reachability feature
which requires less frequent computations.
Fig. 3(b) compares the time taken by MFPT-VI, D-VI-PS, D-MFPT-VI, and D2-
MFPT-PI. Firstly, D-VI-PS is faster than the state-of-the-art VI-PS. Moreover, our
proposed algorithms based on the reachability abstraction are faster than D-VI-PS.
The differential versions of MFPT-VI i.e. D-MFPT-VI and D2-MFPT-VI are faster
compared to MFPT-VI. This clearly establishes the notion of backup differential as
an effective mechanism towards runtime improvement. The results also show that
the D2-MFPT-VI is the fastest compared to the other algorithms. Although the im-

12
S. Debnath, L. Liu, G.S. Sukhatme
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4 Number of iterations required to converge. The x-axis denotes the numbers of states. (a)
Variants of value iteration methods. (b) Backup differential variants. The thick green curve in both
ﬁgures is the result of MFPT-VI.
provement in performance is signiﬁcant on comparing D-MFPT-VI and MFPT-VI,
but its not that signiﬁcant on comparing D-MFPT-VI and D2-MFPT-VI. We believe
that the differential of second order is sufﬁcient in capturing a state’s potential im-
pact, and therefore, we do not analyze beyond the differential of second order.
Next, we evaluate the number of iterations taken by the algorithms to converge to
the optimal policy as the number of states changes. Fig. 4(a) compares the number
of iterations taken by VI, VI-PS and MFPT-VI, respectively. Again, the advantage
of our algorithm is obvious, and the results show that the MFPT-VI requires much
smaller number of iterations compared to the other two algorithms.
Fig. 4(b) compares the number of iterations taken by MFPT-VI, D-VI-PS, D-
MFPT-VI, and D2-MFPT-VI, from which we can observe that the D2-MFPT-PI
converges the fastest amongst all four algorithms. Similar to the runtime behavior
shown above, the differential variants – D-MFPT-VI and D-VI-PS – converge faster
than the non-differential MFPT-VI and VI-PS. This also implies the remarkable
merit of backup differentials as means for faster convergence.
Then, we look into the detailed time taken by the critical components of each
algorithm. A good understanding for the cost of individual component will allow
us to better design state sweeping heuristics. It can be observed from Fig. 5(a) that
most time is used for Bellman backup operations in the case of VI; there is an
additional step involved for sorting the states for the purpose of states prioritization
in case of VI-PS, which is negligible in comparison to the cost of Bellman backup,
as presented in Fig. 5(b). In contrast, majority of time is used for computing the

Reachability and Differential based Heuristics for Solving MDPs
13
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 5 Time taken by individual components of algorithms: (a) VI (b) VI-PS (c) MFPT-VI. In the
ﬁgures, VI/BE, VI-PS/BE and MFPT-VI/BE represent the Bellman Equation component of VI,
VI-PS and MFPT-VI respectively. VI-PS/S denotes the sorting component of VI-PS and MFPT-
VI/FPT represents the component that computes MFPT values in the MFPT-VI algorithm.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 6 (a) The progress of VI, VI-PS and MFPT-VI across iterations. (b) The progress of D-VI-PS,
D-MFPT-VI and D2-MFPT-VI across iterations.
MFPT values in our MFPT-VI algorithm, as shown in Fig. 5(c). Consequently, for
the MFPT-VI related algorithms we suggest to update the MFPT result every few
iterations instead of re-computing it every iteration.
Finally, we are interested in the convergence curve of each algorithm, through
which we can learn and compare the detailed convergence behavior. An important
criterion to judge the convergence is to see if the difference between two consec-
utive iterations is small enough. Thus, we utilize the maximal error ∆S across all
states as an evaluation metric. Speciﬁcally, ∆S = maxsi∈S |V(si) −V ′(si)| where V,
V ′ represent the values of states at iteration i and i+1.
Fig. 6(a) shows that initially VI, VI-PS and MFPT-VI start with the same ∆S
value. In the ﬁrst few iterations, our MFPT-VI approach achieves an extremely
steep descent compared to the non-reachability based VI and VI-PS. For example,
in our simulation scenario (with around 2500 states and a threshold value of 0.1),
the MFPT-VI converges using only 19 iterations; in contrast, VI takes 55 iterations
and VI-PS takes 45.
Fig. 6(b) shows proﬁles for D-VI-PS, D-MFPT-VI and D2-MFPT-PI. Initially,
all the three algorithms start with the same ∆S value. However, both D2-MFPT-VI
and D-MFPT-VI have extremely steep descents in the ﬁrst few iterations as com-
pared D-VI-PS. For instance, in the same simulation example mentioned above, our
D2-MFPT-VI method converges in 12 iterations whereas D-MFPT-VI takes 13 iter-
ations; in contrast, D-VI-PS takes 40 iterations.

14
S. Debnath, L. Liu, G.S. Sukhatme
(a)
(b)
Fig. 7 Illustration of partitioned sub-spaces using the example of Fig. 2. There are four partitions
with different colors and a colder color represents better reachability. The black area in each ﬁgure
denotes obstacle. (a) Captured partitions at an earlier iteration; (b) Captured partitions at a later
iteration.
(a)
Fig. 8 Time comparisons across various variants under different size of partitions with the number
of states set to 2500.
5.2 Solution with Partial Space Sweeping
As discussed in Section 4.4, exploring state space and sweeping in partial space can
further accelerate the convergence. Since the results in full state space reveal that the
reachability based algorithms are faster than other algorithms, we only evaluate the
performances for the reachability based variants including MFPT-VI, D-MFPT-VI,
D-MFPT-VI-H1, D-MFPT-VI-H2.
Speciﬁcally, based on the reachability value computed for each state, we sort
all states and partition the space into n sub-spaces (partitions), using the partition
heuristics of either D-MFPT-VI-H1 or D-MFPT-VI-H2. In this way, states with
similar reachability values are clustered together, e.g., in our simulation scenario
the states of the highest reachability are grouped around the goal state. And, the
smaller the reachability of the states, the farther they are from the goal state. See
Fig. 7 for an illustration.
Fig. 8 shows the time taken by the algorithms as the number of partitions n
changes. The results show that, given the same number of partitions, the D-MFPT-
VI-H2 algorithm is in general the fastest among the three algorithms, indicating that
partitioning the state space measured by states’ potential impacts can achieve better
performance in comparison to partitioning measured by the sizes of sub-spaces. In
contrast, the advantage of D-MFPT-VI-H1 is not obvious as it improves over the
basic MFPT-VI algorithm with a very small margin.

Reachability and Differential based Heuristics for Solving MDPs
15
Fig. 9 Time cost surface of D-MFPT-VI-H2 under different numbers of partitions and states.
Note, although partitioning the space and exploring the partial space can accel-
erate the convergence, we have not decided the ideal number of partitions. For ex-
ample, in Fig. 8 we can see that initially the time taken by the algorithms reduces
as the number of partitions increases. However, after a certain point, the time taken
begins to increase as the number of partitions grows; we can also observe that all
the three algorithms reach the minimal time almost simultaneously when the num-
ber of partitions is at around 5. Finding the optimal partitioning number is difﬁcult
as the state (reachability) values can be very unstructured. Consequently, we use the
experimental method to ﬁnd such number.
We have plotted a clearer proﬁle to capture the minimal-time partition number, as
shown in Fig. 9. In the ﬁgure, the x,y,z axes represent the number of states, number
of partitions, and practical runtime, respectively. Note that, there is a “crease” at the
left side the 3D surface, and the bottom of the crease represent the optimal number
of partitions in our heuristics. Table 5.2 shows the partition numbers that result in
the minimum time taken to calculate the optimal policy for differing state-size. We
can conclude that, the state space partition number need not be very large, and a
partition number of around 2 ∼5 can result in near-optimal runtime.
State-Size 900 1600 2500 3600 4900
Partitions
2
5
5
2
3
Table 1 The number of partitions when the time taken by D-MFPT-VI-H2 is minimum to calculate
the optimal policy across different state-size.
6 Conclusions
In this paper, we propose new heuristics for efﬁciently solving the MDPs. Our pro-
posed framework explores reachability of states using MFPT values, which char-
acterizes the degree of difﬁculty of reaching given goal states. We then introduced
the notion of backup differentials as an extension to the reachability characteriza-
tion to capture more accurate impacts of states so that the prioritized sweeping can
be ameliorated. Also, we demonstrated that our reachability and differential based

16
S. Debnath, L. Liu, G.S. Sukhatme
framework can be further improved using partial-space sweeping strategies. The ex-
perimental results show that in comparison with other state-of-the-art methods, our
algorithms converge much faster, with less running time and fewer iterations.
