WIND PARK POWER PREDICTION: ATTENTION-BASED GRAPH
NETWORKS AND DEEP LEARNING TO CAPTURE WAKE LOSSES
Lars Ødegaard Bentsen
Department of Technology Systems (ITS)
University of Oslo
Kjeller, Norway

Narada Dilp Warakagoda
Department of Technology Systems (ITS)
University of Oslo
Kjeller, Norway
Roy Stenbro
Institute for Energy Systems (IFE)
Kjeller, Norway
Paal Engelstad
Department of Technology Systems (ITS)
University of Oslo
Kjeller, Norway
ABSTRACT
With the increased penetration of wind energy into the power grid, it has become increasingly
important to be able to predict the expected power production for larger wind farms. Deep learning
(DL) models can learn complex patterns in the data and have found wide success in predicting wake
losses and expected power production. This paper proposes a modular framework for attention-based
graph neural networks (GNN), where attention can be applied to any desired component of a graph
block. The results show that the model signiﬁcantly outperforms a multilayer perceptron (MLP) and
a bidirectional LSTM (BLSTM) model, while delivering performance on-par with a vanilla GNN
model. Moreover, we argue that the proposed graph attention architecture can easily adapt to different
applications by offering ﬂexibility into the desired attention operations to be used, which might
depend on the speciﬁc application. Through analysis of the attention weights, it was showed that
employing attention-based GNNs can provide insights into what the models learn. In particular, the
attention networks seemed to realise turbine dependencies that aligned with some physical intuition
about wake losses.
Keywords Wind Power Prediction · Wake Effect · Deep Learning · Graph Attention Neural Networks
1
Introduction
Wind energy has been subject to rapid expansion in recent years, with a record 82 GW of new wind capacity installed
globally, and a year-on-year growth of 53% in 2020 [1]. Due to the intermittent nature of wind energy, research into
wind power modelling and forecasting will remain important to establish wind as a more reliable energy resource.
Turbines have traditionally been characterised by their power curves, a simple relationship that indicates the expected
power production at different wind speeds. However, with the construction of large wind farms, interaction losses from
turbines in near vicinity to each other become prominent, resulting in actual production values deviating from power
curve predictions. The wind velocity deﬁcit and increased turbulence generated downstream of a turbine characterise
the turbine wake, which result in turbines situated downstream seeing a reduction in the power generated. Signiﬁcant
efforts have been spent trying to account for these wake losses, modelling the complicated ﬂow patterns that arise
downstream within a farm. A simple, but widely used method, has been the Jensen wake model, which calculates the
velocity deﬁcit downstream of a single wind turbine [2]. High resolution computational ﬂuid dynamics can yield high
ﬁdelity results [3], but a problem with such numerical methods have been their high computational cost.
DL-based models have the potential to yield accurate results, while also signiﬁcantly reduce run times for trained
models. Various studies have reported success in training artiﬁcial neural networks (ANN) to predict wind farm power
This is the version of the article before peer review or editing, as submitted by an author to Journal of Physics: Conference Series. IOP Publishing
Ltd is not responsible for any errors or omissions in this version of the manuscript or any version derived from it. To cite this article, the Version of
Record is available online at https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/2265 /2/022035.
arXiv:2201.03229v2  [cs.LG]  6 Jun 2022

from the free stream wind velocity and direction [4, 5]. A two-dimensional power curve was introduced by Yan et al.
[5], where the expected power could be determined from the wind speed and direction, thereby taking wake losses into
account. Ti et al. [6] trained an MLP to predict spatial velocity deﬁcit and added turbulence downstream, aiming to
output high resolution ﬂow ﬁelds similar to those of numerical methods.
Tastu et al. [7] considered spatial dynamics by using measurements from a number of farms scattered across Denmark,
to make their predictions for a target wind farm. Similarly, both [8] and [9] proposed spatio-temporal models to make
predictions at a number of wind sites jointly. Ghaderi et al. [9] modelled the spatial characteristics by utilising graphical
representations, where the weather stations were represented by nodes and the physical distance between them as edges
in a graph, using a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network to make the forecasts.
Although Recurrent (RNN) and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) have predominantly been used for time-series
analysis [10, 11, 12], research has also emerged in applying such techniques to capture spatial features. CNNs have
shown superior performance in extracting features from image data. In [13] and [14], the authors aimed to leverage
some of these attributes, by organising the input data in a grid structure, where each pixel contained information for a
particular physical location. Despite yielding good results, a drawback of such an approach is that the strict ordering of
the input data might pose some challenges for complex farm layouts.
Graphs have been used to represent data characterised by complex relations, where the data is not naturally ordered
in a strict grid-like structure. Similar to [9], the authors of [15], [16] and [17] also aimed to improve predictions by
considering measurements from different wind farms, but instead employed graph convolutional models. Bleeg [18]
used a GNN as a surrogate model for a steady-state Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes (RANS) model to learn turbine
interaction losses within a single wind farm. Yu et al. [19] constructed a spatio-temporal model to predict wind power
for individual turbines using a combination of GNNs and RNNs, trained on data for four offshore wind farms. To
improve on the vanilla GNN model, Park et al. [20] proposed the physics-induced GNN (PGNN), where the intensity
of different turbine interactions was regulated by computing weights using a physics-induced wake function. The
authors showed the potential beneﬁts of introducing relative weighting of upstream turbines to learn interaction losses,
using data simulated in FLORIS [21]. Albeit not fully learned from the data, the weighting introduced in the PGNN
draws some resemblance to an attention mechanism, as it regulates the relative impact of neighbouring turbines when
predicting the power for a target turbine.
Attention was ﬁrst introduced by Bahdanau et al. [22], and has become an integral part of sequence modelling using
DL. With regards to wind, attention mechanisms have mainly been used to extract temporal tendencies in time-series
data, and thereby improve RNN-based forecasting models [23, 24, 25]. Due to the success of attention-based sequence
models, there has been a surge in the application of such techniques to other DL domains, such as the development
of Graph Attention Networks [26, 27, 28, 29]. Nevertheless, these networks have yet to ﬁnd their way into the
wind modelling community, as the authors of this paper cannot report on ﬁnding any research discussing the use of
attention-based GNNs applied to wind energy.
The main contributions of this paper can be summarised as follows:
• A BLSTM- and an MLP-model, where inputs are organised around individual turbines, are used to predict the
power for a target turbine given the location of upstream neighbours.
• We propose a modular graph network architecture with attention mechanisms applied to any desired compo-
nents of a GNN model. To the knowledge of the authors, this is the ﬁrst paper that proposes a framework
where attention can be applied to any major operation in a GNN.
• Attention weights are investigated to assess the potency of the proposed GNN framework.
This study shows the advantages of a modular GNN-attention framework. By analysing various DL-based models, the
study also aims to compare the performance of different techniques and show new ways in which DL can be applied to
wind power and wake modelling.
2
Theory
2.1
Bidirectional LSTM
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) represent the quintessential DL model for sequence analysis. RNNs recurrently
apply a shared function over the inputs to learn temporal dependencies, but the basic RNN architecture is prone to
vanishing or exploding gradients, which makes it difﬁcult for the network to learn dependencies for long input sequences.
Long short-term memory (LSTM) cells employ a gated recurrent unit with skip-connections, which allow gradients to
ﬂow for many time-steps, combating this problem [30]. A general illustration of the LSTM block can be seen in Fig. 1,
2

Figure 1: General structure of an LSTM network. The Forget,
Input and Output notation aims to illustrate how the different gating
mechanisms operate.
Figure 2: Single-layer bidirectional architecture,
with LSTM units parametrised by θ1 and θ2.
comprised of input, forget and output gates. The forget gate allows the unit to restrain what information to be kept in
the memory, s. The input gate encodes the current input, xt, and controls its contribution to the memory, while the
output allows the network to focus on relevant parts of the current state to compute the output, h.
Since inputs are processed sequentially, the RNN architecture does not take future context into consideration when
making current predictions. A bidirectional LSTM (BLSTM) could be used, where a second network simultaneously
processes the input sequence in reverse, before outputs from both networks are used to compute the ﬁnal outputs, as
visualised in Fig. 2 [31].
2.2
Attention
Learning to focus on relevant parts of the input, attention aims to allocate computational resources wisely and in some
applications improve the interpretability of the models. Suppose an input sequence x1, x2, ..., xL ∈Rn. Each input, xi,
is matched with all inputs by computing attention scores, using some shared attention mechanism, a, often a single- or
multi-layered perceptron [29, 32]. A softmax function normalises the attention scores to generate probabilities:
αij =
exp(a(xi, xj))
PL
k=1 exp(a(xi, xk))
.
(1)
Finally, the updated values, zi ∈{z1, z2, ..., zL}, are obtained by taking a weighted sum of the inputs, where a value
function, F, is used to transform the inputs, along with a non-linearity, σ:
zi = σ(
L
X
j=1
αijF(xj)).
(2)
Multi-head attention has also been found beneﬁcial for many applications, where the process in eq. (1) and (2) is
repeated, and their outputs concatenated [33].
2.3
Graph Neural Networks
Even though CNNs are excellent at analysing image data, a fundamental limitation of these models, is that these
networks cannot naturally adapt to irregular domains. Graph Neural Networks (GNN) aim to combat this by creating
a more general framework to analyse problems thought to have important relational structures, but lack an inherent
grid-like ordering. The general concepts of GNNs will now be presented, based on the framework outlined in [34].
A graph can be deﬁned as a tuple containing global, edge and node features, G = (u, E, V ). E and V are the sets
containing the edge and node features eij ∈E and vi ∈V . vi are attributes speciﬁc to a node i, while eij are attributes
associated with ‘sending’ from node i to j, such as the distance between two nodes. There is only a single global feature
for each graph, stored in u. Similar to the stacking of layers in CNNs, GNNs employ a series of graph blocks which
extract relevant features sequentially. Global, edge and node features are updated using three functions within each
block, to perform per-edge, per-node and global updates, as:
e′
ij = φe(eij, vi, vj, u)
(3)
v′
j = φv(vj, ¯e′
j, u)
(4)
u′ = φu(¯e′, ¯v′, u),
(5)
3

Figure 3: Visualisation of the ρe→v operation
for an arbitrary graph using summation aggre-
gate function.
Figure 4: Visualisation of the two upstream neighbours for a turbine
i for a particular wind direction, with the relevant wake distances
and angles shown.
where φ(·) represent the update functions, here assumed to be MLPs, (·)′ indicate updated and ¯(·) aggregated features.
Updated features are fed as inputs to the next graph block. Three aggregation functions map edges to nodes, edges to
globals and nodes to globals as follows:
¯e′
j = ρe→v(E′
j), where E′
j = {e′
ij|∀i ∈Rj}
(6)
¯e′ = ρe→u(E′), where E′ = {e′
ij|∀(i, j) ∈U}
(7)
¯v′ = ρv→u(V ′), where V ′ = {v′
i|∀i ∈I}.
(8)
ρ(·)→(·) are the different aggregation operations, e.g. mean or sum. Rj, U and I are index sets containing indices for all
nodes sending to node j, all edge indices (i, j) and all node indices, respectively. These sets deﬁne the connectivity of
the graph. A visualisation of an edge-to-node sum aggregation, ρe→v, can be seen in Fig. 3.
3
Methodology
3.1
Data Description
The wind farm data was simulated in FLORIS [21], using a Gaussian-based wake model [35]. A range of random farm
conﬁgurations were simulated for different wind speeds and directions, varying the layout and number of turbines
from 28 to 150. 18,280 different scenarios were simulated by varying the farm layout, number of turbines and wind
conditions, resulting in 1,200,862 power values for individual turbines. All data was transformed by scaling features
within (0, 1), before being split into test, train and validation sets. The test data was obtained by randomly sampling
20% of the original data. The remaining 80% of the data was partitioned into training and validation sets, using the
same 80-20% split.
3.2
MLP and BLSTM Models
The ﬁrst two DL-based wake models were trained to predict the power production for individual turbines, with
information on the locations of upstream neighbours and the wind speed. Turbines that were within ±30o (i.e.
|α| < 30o with reference to Fig. 4) were considered upstream neighbours. Depending on a turbine’s location within
a farm and the wind direction, its number of upstream neighbours would vary for different time-steps, resulting in
variable length inputs. It should be noted that even though we refer to ‘time’ here, temporal correlations were not
considered, but used to indicate the different inputs with distinct wind conditions and farm layouts. Considering for
example a turbine, i, situated downstream of two turbines, j and k, for a particular wind direction (depicted in Fig. 4),
the BLSTM model would look as:
ˆP (i)
t
= h(wst, g(dij, sin(αij
t ), cos(αij
t ), dik, sin(αik
t ), cos(αik
t ))),
(9)
where ˆP (i)
t
is the predicted power for turbine i at time t, wst the free stream wind velocity, dij the distance between
turbines i and j, and αij
t the angle of j relative to the wind direction. h and g are functions represented by MLP and
BLSTM networks, respectively. The MLP model is very similar to eq. (9), but with padded inputs to ensure constant
length inputs and without the transform g represented by the BLSTM network.
4

Additionally, two baseline models were used to compare against, where one would be trained to predict total farm
power and another to predict power for individual turbines. The inputs to these models only contained information on
the total number of turbines in the farm and the free stream wind velocity. Since the baseline MLP models did not have
any information on farm layout or upstream neighbours, these models should not be able to accurately predict wake
losses. If the other models were able to achieve signiﬁcantly lower prediction errors than the baselines, it would be
concluded that they captured, at least part of, the wake losses.
3.3
GNN Model with Attention
For the GNN models, a graph was created for each wind condition and farm layout, where turbines are represented by
nodes in the graph, with free-stream wind velocity, wst, as input node and global features. Interactions between nodes
were encoded in the edges, with input features as; dij, sin(αij
t ) and cos(αij
t ). An edge exists, sending from turbine i to
j, if turbine i is upstream of turbine j. The number of edges and connectivity of a graph would therefore change for
different wind directions. The GNN produce updated graphs, trained to predict power for individual turbines embedded
in the updated node features, and total farm power in the global.
Graph Attention Networks (GAT) were ﬁrst introduced by Veliˇckovi´c et al. [29], where attention was used to update
nodes in a graph. Edge features might also be important for certain applications, and some studies have therefore tried
to extend the concept of GATs to facilitate such features [26]. Incorporating attention into the model, our ﬁrst aim was
to be able to elegantly handle a variable number of upstream neighbours. Secondly, the attention weights can be seen as
the relative importance placed on different parts of the input by the network. For this particular application, the hope
was that the network would learn weights to focus on the most inﬂuential upstream turbines to determine wake losses,
which should hopefully align with some physical intuition about wind farm dynamics and enhance interpretability.
The proposed method is made up of a modular architecture, where attention can be applied to the different update or
aggregate operations outlined in Sec. 2.3. A visualisation of the proposed graph block can be seen in Fig. 5, where the
original architecture without attention can be retrieved if MLPs and desired aggregate functions are used in place of
the highlighted update and aggregation boxes. Depending on the application, the framework allows for various graph
attention architectures to be tested and attention to be applied to the relevant parts of the network for a particular task.
For instance, if attention was only to be applied in the node update function in Fig. 5, one would retrieve a similar
architecture as the GAT [29].
Considering the NodeAttn block in Fig. 5, the network will attend to all nodes sending to a target node. For a turbine j,
this means computing weights for all i ∈Rj. Such an operation can be considered as masked attention, since the model
does not compute attention weights over the entire input, but only for the nodes that are in the neighbourhood of j. For
this particular study, it was decided to use scaled dot product attention, as in [33]:
αij =
exp((KT [u ∥vi ∥e′
ij])T QT [¯e′
j ∥vj]/
√
d)
P
∀k∈Rj exp((KT [u ∥vk ∥e′
kj])T QT [¯e′
j ∥vj]/
√
d)
,
(10)
where ∥denotes the concatenation operator. Q and K are weights for linear transformations to compute d-dimensional
keys and queries. However, it should be noted that instead of using the keys and queries mapping in scaled dot product
attention, an MLP or other function could still be used, as in eq.(1). The outputs from the NodeAttn block, zj, were
Figure 5: The proposed attention-based graph block. To retrieve the original graph block, without attention, all attention
blocks would be omitted, denoted by -Attn.
and φ denote the aggregation operation and transforms represented by
MLPs, respectively.
5

Figure 6: Edge-transformed graph representation. The same
operations as in the NodeAttn, could then be applied in the
EdgeAttn in Fig.5.
Table 1: MAE Test Results.
Model
MAE Turbine
MAE Farm
BS_Farm
-
0.015820
BS_Turb
0.052266
-
MLP
0.005652
0.000790
BLSTM
0.005331
0.000720
O-Graph
0.001426
0.000511
N-Graph
0.001452
0.000526
F-Graph
0.001441
0.000495
then computed as
zj = σ(
X
∀i∈Rj
αijF T vi).
(11)
For the EdgeAttn, the same operations were performed, but now attending over the edges that send to a target edge. To
obtain a representation where edges send to other edges via nodes, the input graph was transformed to a temporary
edge-graph, where an edge eij sends to ejk via the node vj. The edge-graph mapping was inspired by the works in [26],
producing a new graph with edge features mapped to nodes. Different to [26], the proposed mapping works for directed
graphs, as visualised for an arbitrary graph in Fig. 6. The same attention mechanism used for the NodeAttn could then
be used for the EdgeAttn operation.
Considering the attention operations for the aggregations, similar operations were used, but with different neighbour-
hoods. For the E2VAttn, masked attention was performed over all edges sending to the same node. Since global
features are shared across a single graph, V2UAttn and E2UAttn perform attention over the full input, i.e. not masked,
using all nodes or edges.
4
Results and Discussion
4.1
Wind Power Prediction Accuracy
To assess the performance of the proposed models in predicting wind power production, the Mean Absolute Error
(MAE) metric was used:
MAE = 1
T
T
X
t=1
|ˆyt −yt|,
(12)
where y are true and ˆy predicted values, for T samples. Two losses were computed for predicting individual turbine and
total farm powers, denoted "MAE Turbine" and "MAE Farm" in Table 1. The MLP and BLSTM models improved the
accuracy ten- and twenty-fold for individual turbine and farm predictions, respectively, compared to the basline models,
denoted "BS_" in Table 1. The BLSTM outperformed the MLP model, with an approximate 5 and 10% improvement
for the turbine and farm predictions. Besides a slightly inferior performance, a drawback of the MLP model was that it
would not be able to make predictions on wind farms with a greater number of turbines than what was present in the
training data. Nevertheless, comparing the models to the baselines, it was concluded that both architectures were able to
capture wake losses, though the BLSTM seemed potentially better suited for the variable length inputs.
Considering the graph models in Table 1, all achieved signiﬁcantly better prediction performance than the other models.
Here, O-Graph is the vanilla GNN model without attention. F-Graph employ all attention modules in Fig. 5 for the ﬁrst
graph block layer, while the N-Graph only use attention for the edge-to-node aggregation and the node-update function.
The reason for including both the F- and N-Graph models, was to demonstrate the modularity of the proposed graph
attention framework. The O-Graph model reported the smallest MAE of 0.00143 for individual turbine predictions,
while the F-Graph yielded the best results for total farm predictions, with an MAE of 0.000495. The prediction
performance of the N-Graph model was close to the other graph models, with MAEs of 0.00145 and 0.000526. Despite
slightly different prediction performances between the three graph models, we argue that the comparable results
demonstrate the functioning of the proposed framework in Fig. 5.
6

Figure 7: Attention weights from the F-Graph model for a randomly chosen farm conﬁguration and wind condition. Red
colouring represents a target wind turbine or edge, while blue represents upstream neighbours. E2VAttn, EdgeAttn
and NodeAttn refers to the blocks in Fig. 5.
4.2
Analysis of Attention Weights
Each of the ﬁve attention operations in the F-Graph model used three heads, computing three sets of attention weights
for each operation. Fig. 7 shows the attention weights from the edge-to-node aggregation, edge- and node-update
functions, for a randomly selected farm layout and wind condition during testing, while global attention weights were
excluded from the plots due to the size of the farm. Furthermore, another scenario was also investigated, shown in Fig.
8, in which the turbines were situated in a two-dimensional grid, with the wind direction set to zero degrees. The dots in
the ﬁgures represent turbine locations, with red being the target and blue its upstream neighbours for the particular wind
conditions. Arrows represent edges, sending from the upstream turbines to the target. The width of the arrows and size
of the circles visualise the relative weighting computed by the E2VAttn, EdgeAttn and NodeAttn, respectively, given
by the corresponding numbers in Fig. 7 and 8.
Considering the edge-to-node attention weights, it was seen that the heads seemed to focus on slightly different aspects
of the input. The main focus was placed on the edge sending from the turbine directly upstream and in close vicinity to
the target, i.e. the edge sending from turbine A in Fig. 7 and 8 a-c. From Fig. 7, it was evident that the most important
edges were not necessarily those sending from the turbines closest to the target, as hardly any weighting was placed
on the edge from turbine B. This was interesting, as it showed that the networks were able to learn more complex
behaviours, than simply how close turbines were to the target. Looking at the second head E2VAttn, incrementally
lower attention was placed on edges moving directly upstream from the target, as 0.46, 0.26 and 0.15, for edges A, C
7

Figure 8: Attention weights from the F-Graph model for an ordered wind farm layout with 100% wake overlap. Red
colouring represents a target wind turbine or edge, while blue represents upstream neighbours. E2VAttn, EdgeAttn
and NodeAttn refers to the blocks in Fig. 5.
and F in Fig. 7. Hardly any weighting was placed on other edges, conﬁrmed by the weights in Fig. 8. Intuitively, the
second head might be thought to help determine wake losses by capturing changes when moving directly upstream
from the target wind turbine.
Moving to the EdgeAttn, the second head weights showed similar patterns, with weights tapering off when moving
upstream from the sending target turbine. Since this attention mechanism was used to update edges, there was effectively
two target turbines, one sending and one receiving. Looking at the ﬁrst and third head weights in plots d and f of Fig.
7, weights were more evenly distributed, but still with the most focus placed on turbines upstream of the target edge.
Different to the E2VAttn, more attention was placed on edges sending from turbines moving clock-wise away from
the upstream line, i.e. B, D, G and K. In particular, while the edge from turbine B was negligible for the E2VAttn,
it was highly signiﬁcant for the EdgeAttn in Fig. 7. This behaviour was likely due to the location of the receiving
target turbine, with the turbines receiving signiﬁcantly more weighting since they were inﬂuential to the power of the
receiving target turbine. Observing that the location of the receiving turbine was important and the learned behaviour
for the ﬁrst two attention networks were different was interesting, as it showed that the network could learn complicated
structures in the data.
Again, attention was mainly placed on the turbine directly upstream of the target for the NodeAttn weights. Two of the
heads placed the entire weighting on this turbine, while the second head also attended to the other turbines. For the
ordered farm layout in Fig. 8, the second head did not place any weighting on turbine A. No difference was evident
from the ﬁrst and third head weights, which could imply two things; either, that one head focuses on dependencies
that were not present for the particular layouts and wind conditions in Fig. 7 and 8, or that one of the three heads for
8

the NodeAttn were redundant. The distributed weighting for the second head might indicate that an averaging of the
features for upstream turbines provides important information to determine the power production for a target turbine.
Even though the attention-based models were not able to signiﬁcantly improve on MAEs, investigating the attention
weights showed that the proposed modules were able to learn meaningful dependencies in the data. An important
ﬁnding, was that the attention mechanisms did not learn a simple average of all the input features, as this would mean
that the mechanisms would replicate a similar behaviour to the O-Graph model. Although we were able to deduce some
physical intuition about what the F-Graph model learned, the conclusions drawn were quite simple. Nevertheless, one
might expect that attention mechanisms could be used more extensively to aid in applications where we want to learn
about and understand more complicated physical properties or patterns, that are normally inaccessible to the users of
DL models.
Generally, it was observed that the model seemed exceedingly conﬁdent, often placing almost all the weighing on
a small subset of the inputs, entirely disregarding others. For the E2VAttn weights, this was evident, as turbine B
received almost no weighting in Fig. 7. One could therefore argue that the model might be too sensitive, as slight offsets
in the inputs could result in the model focusing on the wrong features. Even though the high conﬁdence allowed for
perspicuous interpretations of the results, it was thought that this was an inherent reﬂection of the data used. Wind farm
data simulated in FLORIS lack uncertainty, which would be a prominent feature of any real dataset, due to sensor drifts,
non-stationary atmosphere conditions and non-uniform wind ﬁeld across a farm. If the models were instead trained on
real site measurements, it is likely that attention weights might be more evenly distributed, with less values close to 0 or
1, as information from only a small number of upstream turbines might be a poor reﬂection of global characteristics.
For future research, it would be particularly interesting to investigate how the models operate when trained on real farm
measurements or data simulated using more accurate numerical methods that considers non-stationary atmosphere.
Utilising real datasets, it is also thought that the superior performance of the GNN models, with regards to MAEs,
might slightly curtail, as other features than interaction losses might become more pronounced. Nevertheless, for this
preliminary study, the rapid simulations and clean data obtained using FLORIS was important as it allowed for better
analysis of the attention weights, enabling investigation into whether the proposed framework behaved as desired.
5
Conclusion
In this study, it was seen that graph models can outperform other DL architectures in predicting turbine powers
using data simulated in FLORIS. A novel framework was proposed to apply attention to all the relevant update- or
aggregate-functions in a GNN model and the framework achieved results on-par with vanilla GNN models. Through
analysis of the attention weights, it was seen how the networks learned interactions between turbines and were able
to produce results that aligned well with some physical intuition about wake losses. For future research, it will be
interesting to investigate how attention mechanisms can help to learn more complex physical behaviours or improve
prediction performance of graph models applied to wind-based technologies. Furthermore, the modular framework
allows full ﬂexibility for the user and it is a hope that it can aid in the development of graph-attention models for a
range of different research applications in the future.
