arXiv:1106.1510v1  [cs.AI]  8 Jun 2011
Towards OWL-based Knowledge Representation
in Petrology
Alex Shkotin, Vladimir Ryakhovsky, and Dmitry Kudryavtsev
Vernadsky State Geological Museum, Russian Academy of Sciences
Mokhovaya 11/11, 125009, Moscow, Russia

Abstract. This paper presents our work on development of OWL-driven
systems for formal representation and reasoning about terminological
knowledge and facts in petrology. The long-term aim of our project is to
provide solid foundations for a large-scale integration of various kinds of
knowledge, including basic terms, rock classiﬁcation algorithms, ﬁndings
and reports. We describe three steps we have taken towards that goal
here. First, we develop a semi-automated procedure for transforming a
database of igneous rock samples to texts in a controlled natural language
(CNL), and then a collection of OWL ontologies. Second, we create an
OWL ontology of important petrology terms currently described in nat-
ural language thesauri. We describe a prototype of a tool for collecting
deﬁnitions from domain experts. Third, we present an approach to for-
malization of current industrial standards for classiﬁcation of rock sam-
ples, which requires linear equations in OWL 2. In conclusion, we discuss
a range of opportunities arising from the use of semantic technologies in
petrology and outline the future work in this area.
Keywords: OWL, petrology, controlled natural language,
formal conceptualization, rock classiﬁcation, formal theory
1
Introduction
Petrology, a branch of geology studying rocks and their formation, plays an im-
portant role in describing Earth’s crust structure, which is essential for revealing
patterns in distribution of mineral resources. Similar to other natural sciences,
a wealth of knowledge requiring a proper management (especially with regard
to consistency) and integration has been accumulated in petrology. These tasks
could be approached more eﬃciently, if the knowledge had been machine pro-
cessable, in particular, if a formal theory of petrology (i.e. a system of axioms,
deﬁnitions and theorems [11], p.33) had been available. Ontologies, especially
OWL ontologies, are well suited for playing the role of a cornerstone of such
theory, as they have been remarkably successful in other sciences, e.g., bioinfor-
matics, chemistry, and health care.
This paper describes our steps towards developing a formal theory of petrol-
ogy. We focus on identifying basic terms, providing deﬁnitions to other commonly

2
used terms i.e., terms used in industrial standards, and namely, rock types such
as rhyolite or harzburgite, and formalizing the basic set of axioms. We use OWL
as a main formalization tool enabling us, in particular, to automatically check
our representation for consistency.
It is only natural to start developing a theory by identifying the important
terms to be later used for representing facts, e.g., knowledge about speciﬁc rock
samples. Such facts are typically stored in relational databases in modern petrol-
ogy, so relational databases can be used as a source of terms. We describe the
conversion of one such database, namely Proba [5] (Sample in Russian), to a
collection of OWL ontologies containing facts expressed using an initial set of
currently undeﬁned terms in the 2 section.
Once the terms have been identiﬁed, we proceed to their formalization, i.e.,
writing their deﬁnitions in OWL. First, it is essential to deﬁne the basic terms,
which can be used to deﬁne all other terms. Currently available deﬁnitions are
usually stored in a semi-structured form in natural language thesauri. Besides
other issues, this often leads to contradictions, especially given diﬀerences be-
tween schools in petrology. We use one such thesaurus, namely the Glossary
of Igneous Rocks [7], to deﬁne petrological terms and relationships in an OWL
ontology. In addition, we develop a webProtege-based tool to enable domain ex-
perts to work collaboratively on term deﬁnitions, in particular, to agree upon
them. See the 3 section for details.
Finally, we complement the ontology by using another rich source of term
deﬁnitions - internationally adopted scientiﬁc recommendations describing rock
sample classiﬁcation methodologies, e.g. Igneous Rocks: A Classiﬁcation and
Glossary of Terms [10]. The 4 section describes an approach to extracting def-
initions from the standard and expressing them as OWL axioms. As it stands,
OWL 2 is insuﬃcient for a complete capture of terms semantics (as speciﬁed
in the standard), but this would be possible if path free linear equations were
adopted.1 We conclude the paper by summarizing our experience from the de-
scribed work and outlining plans for the future.
2
Formalizing Facts: From Database to OWL
A considerable amount of important information is saved in databases, but in the
form of data, which, unfortunately, is not a knowledge and requires an essential
and laborious processing to obtain knowledge. This section describes a direct
way of getting knowledge from the data: database conversion to the traditional
form of knowledge, i.e. knowledge in a natural language. The natural language
is limited to CNL to make this knowledge machine processable. We follow T.
Kuhn: CNLs are subsets of natural languages that are restricted in a way that
allows their automatic translation into formal logic. p.5 [9]. We consider CNL as
a universal tool for representing a formal ontological knowledge.
1 The
details
of
the
proposed
extensions
are
available
at
http://www.w3.org/TR/owl2-dr-linear/.
Our
work
on
petrology
may
be
viewed as a use case for supporting linear equations in future OWL versions.

3
The original database. Proba DB [5] contains data from 1,174 scientiﬁc arti-
cles (Bibliography table) about 49,285 samples of igneous rocks (Measurements
table). Samples are collected all over the globe, which is reﬂected in the Lo-
calities, llocal, lglobal and lgroup tables. The samples are assigned a rock type
(Rocks table), a genesis type (Errupttypes table), age (ages table), and, which is
the main thing, weight percentage (Concentrations table) of chemical substances
and isotopes (list in the Elements table).
This brief description alone already shows that table and column identiﬁers
can only approximately match the terms used by petrologists to exchange sample
data. The transition to CNL also solves the problem of converting the data saved
in RDB to knowledge in a form directly understandable to experts in the subject
domain.
CNL sentences. List 1 includes examples of all types of CNL sentence required
to present all facts contained in the Proba DB. Local (internal) proper names
required to name various objects within the knowledge base are used in the sen-
tences. So, PUB5633 is the name of article number 5633 (from bibliography.id)
in the DB. SAM32994 is the name of sample number 32994 (from measure-
ments.id) in the DB, etc. Words are connected by letter “ ” in compound terms.
The text also contains well-known global proper names, for example, Iceland,
Atlantic Ocean.
List 1. Example of CNL sentences.
PUB5633 is a publication.
A title of PUB5633 is "A CONTRIBUTION TO THE GEOLOGY OF THE K...".
SAM32994 is a sample. SAM32994 is a rhyolite.
PUB5633 describes SAM32994.
PLC32994 is a place. PLC32994 is a part of Iceland.
A gathering_place of SAM32994 is PLC32994.
SUB469812 is a substance. SAM32994 includes SUB469812.
WPC469812 is a weight_percent. A value of WPC469812 is 73.95.
A component of WPC469812 is SUB469812.
The sentence structure is very simple. A very limited natural language is
actually required to record all facts contained in a RDB if RDB is normalized.
But RDB Proba is normalized not everywhere. Completing normalization is one
of the tasks of reorganizing a DB to enable automatic conversion to knowledge.
Rules of mapping the RDB content to CNL have been developed. These rules
are the speciﬁcation for SQL-scripts dumping RDB to CNL text [15].
OWL ontology: getting and analysis. All generated sentences are ACE lan-
guage [3] sentences, and are selected so that a concrete APE compiler 2 could
compile them to OWL. A portion of the knowledge contained in each article is
2 Attempto Parsing Engine http://attempto.ifi.uzh.ch/site/tools/

4
separated as a text (ACE ﬁle) to be converted to an independent ontology (DL
species is AL(D)). Thus, the DB will be converted to 1,174 ontologies. Columns
values mainly form attribute values, but also class names (rhyolite, harzburgite)
and individual names (Iceland). Let’s consider the ontology obtained for an arti-
cle with a DB number of 5633. The obtained classes, properties and individuals
are listed below.
Classes: place, publication, rhyolite, sample, substance, weight percent.
Object properties: component, describes, gathering place, includes, mixture, part.
Data properties: authorial number, chemical formula, ﬁrst page, journal reference,
last page, latitude, longitude, reference, title, value, year.
Individuails: Atlantic Ocean, Iceland etc.
All the terms used except rhyolite refer to contexts outside of petrology and
even geology. These are the contexts of geography (place, etc), scientiﬁc publi-
cations (publication etc), solid state physics (sample, substance, weight percent
etc), chemistry (chemical formula). The rest of the report focuses on obtaining
rock type deﬁnitions, including that for rhyolite.
3
Formalizing Terminology: From Natural Language to
OWL
The ontology of the facts speciﬁes that the part of names used for classes, rela-
tions, individuals belongs to a diﬀerent ontology (vocabulary). This dictionary
ontology is supposed to provide term deﬁnitions, and the author of the arti-
cle has exactly this understanding in mind. Such scientiﬁc terms are normally
already collected in a dictionary, for example, Petrographic Dictionary [12], Dic-
tionary of Geological Terms [4], Dictionary of Igneous Rocks Terms [7], Glossary
of Geology [1]. The dictionary represents a very important and speciﬁc type of
knowledge. It is based on subject domain terms and informal deﬁnitions of these
terms. Example: harzburgite rock type article from [10], p.88:
HARZBURGITE. An ultramaﬁc plutonic rock composed essentially of
olivine and orthopyroxene. Now deﬁned modally in the ultramaﬁc rock
classiﬁcation (Fig. 2.9, p.28). (Rosenbusch, 1887, p.269; Harzburg, Harz
Mts, Lower Saxony, Germany; Troeger 732; Johannsen v.4, p.438; Tomkeieﬀ
p.247)
We have converted a speciﬁc dictionary ([7]) initially presented by authors as
an html page to an OWL ontology. We begin the formalization of relations be-
tween terms (for example, synonymy) and term properties (for example, become
outdated).
Converting the dictionary text to ontology. We took the Dictionary of
Terms of Igneous Rock Types compiled by the Interdepartmental Petrographic
Committee in the Department of Earth Sciences of the Russian Academy of
Sciences [7]. The dictionary contains 1,567 articles, the overwhelming majority

5
of them being rock names. The dictionary structure and conversion procedures
required to get the ontology are described in [13] and most important below.
Vocabulary: Words are connected by letter “ ” in compound terms.
Article title: The dictionary article title contains a Russian term and its English
equivalent in a simple case, but its both Russian and English synonyms are often
speciﬁed as well. Each term present in the title generates an ontology class. Thus,
the ontology will contain classes in Russian and in English. All terms from one
title are considered synonyms, i.e. their classes are declared equivalent. These
conversions resulted in 3,179 classes and 1,659 class equivalence axioms having
appeared in the ontology.
The text of the article: The basic dictionary article text parts are: term deﬁnition,
comment, list of links to references (normally at the end), term origin description
(normally located on the list of references after the article, in which the term was
introduced). Comments and a list of links to references located in some parts
of the ontology in the form of separate annotations are supposed to be selected
from the text of the article.
The dictionary ontology (DL species is ALUF(D)) is published3 and can be
viewed using any ontology browser at this moment.
Collective management of scientiﬁc term deﬁnitions. Another copy of
the ontology is accessible by means of webProtege 4 installed on the Geology
portal5. The dictionary ontology is ’dic’ there.
It is important that a preﬁx and a namespace be assigned to each dictionary.
We have for terms of the ontology itself, terms from the Moscow State University
Geoweb portal, terms from the Petrographic Code of Russia [8], and terms from
the [7] dictionary, respectively:
prefix dic: <//earth.jscc.ru/ontologies/dic.owl#>
prefix gwr: <//wiki.web.ru/wiki#>
prefix pgcc: <//www.igem.ru/site/petrokomitet/code#>
prefix pgc: <//www.igem.ru/site/petrokomitet/slovar#>
A formal term meaning deﬁnition is critical for developing a formal theory.
For example, the current version of the dictionary provides a formal deﬁnition
of the abessedite rock type (see Portlet Axioms for dic:abessedite), and namely
peridotite and minerals mixture and
contains mineral only (olivin or hornblende or phlogopite)
This formula is written using the Manchester OWL syntax. It is important
that petrologists are able to read it. The process of obtaining a formal (math-
ematical) deﬁnition, especially in a form clear to experts, is described further,
3 http://earth.jscc.ru/ontologies/dic.owl
4 http://protegewiki.stanford.edu/index.php/WebProtege
5 http://earth.jscc.ru/webprotege/

6
and is one of project’s main ultimate goals. The [13] report contains details of
the work done.
4
Formalizing Rock Classiﬁcation
Rules of rock type assignment to samples are described in [10] and consist of a
description of initial-classiﬁcation algorithm and diagrams of ﬁnal classiﬁcation
by percentage of essential minerals. We begin with a speciﬁcation of all parts
of the algorithm, sample data being its input and term (word combination)
representing sample rock type its output. The algorithm is written as a set of
functions in the form of a ﬂowchart clear to petrologists.
The algorithm uses some real-valued functions and unary predicates. These
functions and predicates are supposed to have value on any solid [2]. Some of
these functions and predicates have been given deﬁnitions, deﬁnitions should be
found for other ones, and some will probably remain without deﬁnitions and
will enter in the formal theory as primary ones. The algorithm and necessary
deﬁnitions are given for ultramaﬁc types of plutonic rock as an example. It
is shown then how to get formal deﬁnitions of some types of rock from the
algorithm.
VPC means mineral Volume Percentage Content of the sample and is also
known as “volume modal data”.
We name an algorithm function (for example, ultramafic rock type) re-
ceiving sample data at its input and returning a sample rock type name classi-
fying.
Quantitative and Qualitative Characteristics. We need unary real-valued
functions returning the volume percentage of minerals in a solid. The full set of
minerals required for the algorithm will be gradually clariﬁed.
The following functions of one argument returning a real number were re-
quired till now: VPC melilite, VPC kalsilite, VPC leucite, VPC Ol, VPC Opx,
VPC Cpx, VPC hornblende, VPC garnet, VPC spinel, and VPC biotite. These
functions are primary and may be measured.
We also need the VPC of groups of minerals (see [10] p. 4, [6] p. 6): VPC Q,
VPC A, VPC P, VPC F and VPC M. It is clear that these functions have deﬁnitions.
The VPC M deﬁnition is given below.
The following unary predicates will be required to describe the sample:
pyroclastic, kimberlite, lamproite, lamprophyre, charnockite, plutonic,
and volcanic. All of these predicates are supposed to have deﬁnitions. The
deﬁnition of pyroclastic is given below.
Deﬁnitions. All the deﬁnitions currently available can be found in a technical
report [14]. We show typical examples here. All deﬁnitions are based on two
sources: “Igneous Rocks: A Classiﬁcation and Glossary of Terms” [10] and ‘BGS
Rock Classiﬁcation Scheme” [6], and are conﬁrmed by petrologists.

7
VPC Px: the modal content of pyroxenes (required to classify some plutonic
rocks):
VPC Px(x) =def VPC Opx(x) + VPC Cpx(x)
Where
=def means by deﬁnition[16].
VPC OOC and VPC OPH: VPC of mineral groups. We need these deﬁnitions to
formalize the diagrams on Fig. 2.9, p. 28 of [10].
VPC OOC(x) =def VPC Ol(x) + VPC Opx(x) + VPC Cpx(x)
VPC OPH(x) =def VPC Ol(x) + VPC Px(x) + VPC hornblende(x)
VPC M: returns volume percentage of group M (maﬁc) minerals in the sample (p.
4, 28 see [10], and especially [6] p. 6). Following the direct instructions given in
[6] p. 6:
M = maﬁc and related minerals, that is all other minerals apart from
QAPF;...
we obtain the deﬁnition:
VPC M(x) =def 100 - (VPC Q(x) + VPC A(x) + VPC P(x) + VPC F(x))
pyroclastic: We mainly rely on the 2.2 PYROCLASTIC ROCKS AND TEPHRA
section [10], p. 7.
pyroclastic(x) =def clastic(x) ∧(∀y clast(y) ∧part of(y,x)
→volcanic eruption result(y))
This can also be represented in DL:
pyroclastic ≡clastic ⊓∀(part of ◦id(clast))−.volcanic eruption result
Algorithm. Our algorithm is a further formalization (and elaboration!) of the
classiﬁcation rules provided in the [10]. The algorithm is written as a set of func-
tion ﬂowcharts, the main function being the classifying rock type function. This
function should be invoked to classify a sample. We have also created ﬂowcharts
for the ultramaﬁc rock classifying function and two diagrams on Fig.2.9 [10], p.
28: OOC diagram ﬁeld (the upper triangle) and OPH diagram ﬁeld (the lower
triangle). The IUGS diagram ﬂowcharts are deliberately presented as a chain
of if-nodes, each one being responsible for one speciﬁc diagram area. Each if-
condition represents a system of linear inequalities. The set of such conditions
has important mathematical properties:
– Any two conditions are incompatible, since areas corresponding to them are
mutually disjoint
– The union of all conditions gives inequalities for a triangle, since conditions
cover the entire triangle
It is important that the described properties can be checked automatically if
deﬁnitions are loaded in a reasoner working with linear inequalities.

8
Rock type predicate deﬁnition. The classiﬁcation algorithm implicitly con-
tains deﬁnitions of all types of igneous rock. Deﬁnitions can be obtained from
the algorithm in the form of formulas one free variable formulas of predicate cal-
culus of ﬁrst order with numbers. The formula structure shows the complexity
of the concept behind the term, and also speciﬁes all the concepts underlying
a term. This is extremely important for ﬁnding the primary concepts. We have
quite formally, i.e. using mathematical conversions, obtained formulas for the
harzburgite and dunite predicates.
harzburgite: when applied to the sample, the harzburgite predicate should
give “true” if the sample is harzburgite, and “false” otherwise. Flowcharts have
to be tracked from top to bottom, and conditions leading to a OOC diagram ﬁeld
ﬂowchart node producing the “harzburgite” value collected, to get a predicate.
These conditions should be connected by the logical operation “and”. The con-
versions will give the following formula:
harzburgite(x) = def
plutonic(x) ∧¬ (pyroclastic(x) ∨kimberlite(x)
∨lamproite(x) ∨lamprophyre(x) ∨charnockite(x))
∧VPC carbonates(x)≤50 ∧VPC melilite(x)≤10 ∧VPC M(x) ≥90
∧VPC kalsilite(x)=0 ∧VPC leucite(x)=0 ∧VPC hornblende(x)=0
∧0.4*VPC OOC(x)≤VPC Ol(x)≤0.9*VPC OOC(x)
∧VPC Cpx(x)<0.05*VPC OOC(x)
Thus, a precise deﬁnition of the harzburgite igneous rock type consists of three
parts:
1. Qualitative characteristics (lines 1, 2).
2. Absolute restrictions on modal data (lines 3, 4).
3. Relative restrictions on modal data (lines 5, 6).
Now we can compare this deﬁnition with the informal deﬁnition quoted in
Section 3: the formal deﬁnition is more complete. It does not suppose anything
and does not refer to the diagram. It contains the necessary part of the diagram.
5
Lessons Learnt, What is Next?
This paper describes our experience of converting the petrological information
stored in databases, glossaries, and classiﬁcation standards to a formal OWL-
based representation. A similar approach, i.e. one based on providing unambigu-
ous and consistent deﬁnitions for all terms, can be used in developing a formal
theory for virtually any scientiﬁc area. We will now brieﬂy summarize the results
and outline plans for the future.
From data to knowledge. Moving from a database of petrological facts to a knowl-
edge base is beneﬁcial from multiple perspectives. Firstly, the new representation
is richer and enables generation of sentences in a controlled natural language,
which, in our experience, are understandable to geologists. They can be used
not only as an interface to the KB, but also to annotate publications, which

9
should lead to increased amounts of machine-processable metadata. Secondly,
the KB (equipped with a CNL-based interface and a SPARQL endpoint) can be
integrated with the ontology that provides the vocabulary. This is important for
ensuring a consistent use of the terminology across all information systems us-
ing the KB. The stored knowledge can be further integrated with other available
datasets, e.g. those provided by the EarthChem consortium. 6
Centralized vocabulary. Providing a controlled vocabulary is essential for manag-
ing the knowledge. In our case, it was most important to collect the terms used
in the database in a single OWL ontology, and give them unambiguous deﬁni-
tions along with human-readable annotations. This is a substantial improvement
compared to the previous situation where terms were deﬁned informally and in
multiple, often contradictory sources. The resulting system can be used both as
a dictionary (for people and applications i.e., via SPARQL) and as a tool for
collaborative work on terminology.
Rock classiﬁcation. The formal deﬁnitions of the terms captured in standard
OWL are not detailed enough to support automated rock sample classiﬁcation,
which is one of the most important use cases in petrology. To this end, we have
investigated the possibility of complementing the deﬁnitions with quantitative
restrictions on their mineral composition. Such restrictions can be deﬁned using
linear equations, a possible extension to the current data ranges in OWL 2.
Similarly to databases and glossaries, the classiﬁcation recommendations,
namely [10], are sometimes ambiguous and incomplete as well, so their formal-
ization requires collaboration with petrologists from the Subcommission on the
Systematics of Igneous Rocks of the International Union of Geological Sciences.
However, we managed to identify some predicates and functions requiring deﬁ-
nitions, which can be used as building blocks of a formal theory. Following the
methodology described in the 4 section, we have obtained detailed deﬁnitions
for two types of rock as well as for some auxiliary terms. We plan to extend this
work to cover all rock types in the classiﬁcation.
Our work enables answering questions like Is a current object a sample of
a certain rock? by performing instance checking, a standard reasoning task in
OWL. However, this can be extended to query answering to ﬁnd all possible rock
types for a speciﬁc sample or to ﬁnd all samples of a speciﬁc type in the KB.
This, however, requires reasoning with linear inequalities, which is not supported
at large scale at the moment (some reasoners are available, e.g. RACER).
Finally, we would like to stress that our approach to formalization diﬀers
from what can be seen in many biological and chemical ontologies. They are
often deep class hierarchies with numerous asserted subsumptions between class
names and with relatively few deﬁnitions. We focus on providing detailed deﬁ-
nitions (using standard OWL and linear equations) instead, and plan to rely on
automated reasoners to build and maintain the hierarchy. This may enable use
6 EarthChem is a community-driven eﬀort to facilitate the preservation, discovery and
visualization of and access to the broadest and richest geochemical datasets possible:
http://www.earthchem.org.

10
of the ontologies in a broader range of situations as illustrated by rock sample
classiﬁcation.
Acknowledgments. We would like to thank Dr. Kaarel Kaljurand from At-
tempto group for the idea of using proper names, Dr. Stephen M. Richard from
Arizona Geological Survey for comments on the report [14], helpful discussion
and reference to [6]; and Pavel Klinov from the University of Manchester for
numerous invaluable comments on this paper.
