A Survey on Deep Industrial Transfer Learning in Fault Prognostics 
1 
 
 
 
A Survey on Deep Industrial Transfer 
Learning in Fault Prognostics 
 
Benjamin Maschler1 
 
ABSTRACT  
Due to its probabilistic nature, fault prognostics is a prime example of a use case for deep learning 
utilizing big data. However, the low availability of such data sets combined with the high effort of 
fitting, parameterizing and evaluating complex learning algorithms to the heterogenous and dynamic 
settings typical for industrial applications oftentimes prevents the practical application of this 
approach. Automatic adaptation to new or dynamically changing fault prognostics scenarios can be 
achieved using transfer learning or continual learning methods. In this paper, a first survey of such 
approaches is carried out, aiming at establishing best practices for future research in this field. It is 
shown that the field is lacking common benchmarks to robustly compare results and facilitate 
scientific progress. Therefore, the data sets utilized in these publications are surveyed as well in 
order to identify suitable candidates for such benchmark scenarios.  
Keywords Artificial Intelligence, Continual Learning, Domain Adaptation, Fault Prognostics, 
Feature Extraction, Regression, Remaining Useful Lifetime, Survey, Transfer Learning 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Fault prognostics is the ability to predict the time at which an entity becomes dysfunctional, i.e. faulty [1]. 
Depending on the entity and its environment, causes for faults can be diverse and complex, rendering fault 
prognostics highly probabilistic. In recent years, the combination of big data and deep learning methods have 
demonstrated to have a great potential [1–3]. However, many approaches delivering promising results in research 
environments fail to achieve wide-spread utilization in industry [4–7]. 
One major challenge towards a wider adoption is the high effort of fitting, parameterizing and evaluating complex 
learning algorithms to the heterogenous and dynamic settings typical for industrial applications [1, 3, 4]. This is 
especially severe for fault prognostics, as failures are usually to be avoided in productive systems, making the 
collection of labeled training data sets even harder than usual. A lack of automatic adaptability and ready-to-use 
architectures or frameworks diminishes the benefits data-driven fault prognostics could bring and thereby deters 
potential users [4].  
It is therefore necessary to lower the effort of adapting learning algorithms to changing problems – may those 
changes be caused by internal problem dynamics or by the problem being new and dissimilar from others. One 
promising approach is the transfer of knowledge between different, unidentical instances of a problem, e.g. by 
deep transfer or deep continual learning [4]. However, this being a recent research trend, not much comparison or 
benchmarking of methods nor results has been published and no best practice analysis been performed.  
Although there are first surveys on transfer learning in technical applications in general [8], there are none on fault 
prognostics in particular, yet. Therefore, the objective of this article is 
• 
to provide a brief introduction in industrial transfer learning methods as well as fault prognostics basics 
in order to facilitate mutual understanding between experts of the respective fields, 
 
1 University of Stuttgart, Department of Computer Science, Electrical Engineering and Information Technology, Pfaffenwaldring 47, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany, +49 711 685 

2 
                                                       A Survey on Deep Industrial Transfer Learning in Fault Prognostics 
 
• 
to provide a comprehensive overview of published research activities in the field of deep industrial 
transfer learning for fault prognostics and to analyze it with regards to best practices and lessons learned 
in order to consolidate scientific progress and, thereby, offer guidance for future research projects, 
• 
to provide a comprehensive overview of open-access fault prognostics data sets suitable for deep 
industrial transfer learning research and to analyze it in order to lower the threshold for new research in 
this field and allow for a benchmarking of results. 
This article is organized as follows: Chapter 2 introduces the concepts and methods of deep industrial transfer 
learning as well as the basic principles of fault prognostics. Chapter 3 then briefly describes the research 
methodology. Chapter 4 is divided into two parts: The first part presents the surveyed publications while the second 
part presents the corresponding data sets. Chapter 5 retains this structure, discussing first the publications and then 
the data sets. Chapter 6 concludes this article and points out new research directions. 
2. RELATED WORK 
In this chapter, first, the concepts and methods of deep industrial transfer learning are introduced. Then, an 
overview of the principles of fault prognostics is presented. Both serve to set the terminology for the remainder of 
this article and facilitate understanding between experts of the respective fields. 
2.1 DEEP INDUSTRIAL TRANSFER LEARNING 
A general approach to overcome the described challenges is the transfer of knowledge across multiple (sub-) 
problems. This makes it possible to create a (more) complete model of the problem to be solved across different 
scenarios and to adapt it dynamically again and again without the need to completely retrain the algorithm 
representing said model every time. 
In machine learning research, a distinction is made between two families of solutions: transfer learning, which 
aims solely at better solving a new target problem [9], and continual learning, which aims at solving a new target 
problem while maintaining the ability to solve previously encountered source problems [10]. In practice, however, 
this theoretical division often turns out to be unsuitable, since both the generalization capabilities of continual 
learning and the specialization capabilities of transfer learning might be helpful in extracting generalities from 
various, known (sub-)problems and then adapting them to the problem at hand [8]. This is to be represented by the 
term industrial transfer learning [4, 8, 11]. 
Different methods of machine learning can be utilized in the context of (industrial) transfer resp. continual learning, 
e.g. artificial neural networks, support vector machines or Bayesian networks [9, 12]. When only deep learning 
methods are used, this is referred to as deep industrial transfer learning. 
If the transfer of knowledge from known problems can influence the learning of solutions to new problems, then 
such an influence does not necessarily have to be positive. A harmful knowledge transfer is therefore called 
negative transfer [9, 12]. It is defined with regards to the difference in performance of a given learning algorithm 
with and without using data of the source problem, the so-called transfer performance. If the performance is better 
without using data of the source problem, negative transfer is present. 
In practice, there are three main approach categories used in deep industrial transfer learning. The following sub-
chapters will introduce them briefly.  
2.1.1 Feature representation transfer 
Feature representation transfer includes approaches which map the samples from the source and target problems 
into a common feature space to improve training of the target problem [8, 9, 12]. A central concept of feature 
representation transfer is domain adaptation [9, 12]. A distinction is made between unsupervised domain 
adaptation, i.e., requiring no target labels at all, and semi-supervised domain adaptation, i.e., requiring only a few 
target labels. Domain adaptation is usually based on minimizing the distance between the feature distributions of 
the different (sub)problems. Common metrics for this distance are the maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) or the 
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence. 
2.1.2 Parameter transfer 
Parameter transfer includes approaches, which pass parameters or initializations from the learning algorithm 
trained on the source problem to the target problem learning algorithm to improve its initialization before actual 
training on the target problem begins [8, 9, 12]. Two forms of parameter transfer can be distinguished in deep 
industrial transfer learning: 
Partial parameter transfer includes approaches that pass only the parameters of the feature extractor from the 
learning algorithm trained on the source problem to the target problem learning algorithm [13]. The feature 

A Survey on Deep Industrial Transfer Learning in Fault Prognostics 
3 
 
 
extractor is then not subject to the training on the target problem but remains static throughout that phase. Such 
use of a shared feature extractor reduces the training effort on the target problem, because only a small part of 
the entire learning algorithm still needs to be trained [14]. 
Full parameter transfer includes approaches that pass all parameters and initializations of the learning algorithm 
trained on the source problem to the target problem learning algorithm [13]. The transferred learning algorithm is 
then further trained on the target problem. This process, also called finetuning, reduces the training effort on the 
target problem, because the learning algorithm is already pre-trained [14]. 
2.1.3 Regularization 
Regularization-based continual learning includes approaches which extend the loss function of an algorithm to 
penalize the changing of parameters that were important for solving previously learned tasks [8, 10]. It is therefore 
related to finetuning, because it involves passing all parameters and initializations of the learning algorithm trained 
on the source problem to the target problem learning algorithm. However, most of the prominent examples of 
regularization methods are only suitable for classification problems [15].  
2.2 FAULT PROGNOSTICS 
A fault is understood to be the arrival at a state of dysfunctionality. In relation to industrial components, this can 
be accompanied by the failure of other components or higher-level systems. Due to the high costs associated with 
unplanned failures, fault prognostics is an important field of research. Its subject is the prediction of the timing of 
a failure - usually without further consideration of its cause. Its goal is, among other things, to enable proactive 
maintenance, to increase operational safety and to reduce fault costs [2, 16–18]. 
Usually, three different approaches to fault prognostics are distinguished: 
Model-based approaches, further subdivided into physics-based and expert-based approaches [17], describe 
deterioration processes using mathematical models and starting from the causes of faults and the factors 
influencing them. Such approaches are very efficient and accurate but require a complete understanding of the 
system. Adaptation to new or changed scenarios usually has to be done manually and is therefore only worthwhile 
for static and expensive scenarios [2, 16]. Data-based approaches, further subdivided into numerical or statistical 
and machine learning-based approaches [17], describe deterioration processes on the basis of historical data, which 
can be obtained either from the real plants, from test setups or simulations. Such approaches are usually 
inexpensive to develop, easy to adapt, and require little or no understanding of the system. On the other hand, they 
are very demanding in terms of variety, quantity and quality of data, and sometimes require a lot of training [2, 
16]. Hybrid approaches combine model- and data-based methods with the goal to increase the quality of data-
based approaches without generating the high effort of exclusively model-based approaches [2, 16]. 
There is a large canon of research on data-based fault prognostics using deep learning methods. They can be 
categorized into two different classes based on their objective: 
The prediction of the Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) as a continuous percentage of the total lifetime is the 
usual approach for fault prognostics [1, 3, 19, 20]. It is a regression problem. CNN, RNN, Autoencoder and Deep 
Belief Networks are mainly used [1–3]. Occasionally, time series prediction using LSTM is also used for RUL 
prediction [21]. Due to the fact that many characteristics due not significantly change during the first part of the 
total lifetime [22], sometimes a piecewise linear RUL (p-RUL) is used instead of the fully linear RUL. 
An alternative to RUL prediction is State of Health (SoH) estimation in the form of a multi-class classification. 
While the term SoH originally originated in the field of battery research, where it was also a continuous percentage 
SoH% related to the ratio of different actual performance parameters to their respective nominal values [19, 20, 
23], the term is now also used for a discrete classification of the remaining lifetime SoHclass - both in the battery 
context [24, 25] and beyond [26–29]. SoHclass estimation is primarily used when RUL prediction is not possible, 
 
FIGURE 1.  RUL, p-RUL, SoH% and SoHclass as a function of useful lifetime already passed 
Passed Useful Lifetime
0 %
0 %
100 %
100 %
SoHclass
ok
at risk
declining

4 
                                                       A Survey on Deep Industrial Transfer Learning in Fault Prognostics 
 
for example, for methodological reasons or due to insufficient training data. In some cases, the more accurate RUL 
prediction is deliberately omitted because the SoHclass estimation is less complex and sufficient for the application 
at hand. Occasionally, the SoHclass is also used as a preliminary stage of a subsequent RUL prediction [30, 31]. 
Figure 1 shows an example of RUL, p-RUL, SoH% and SoHclass as a function of useful lifetime already passed. It 
can be seen that SoH% is advantageous over linear RUL in the context of strongly non-linear behavior of e.g. 
battery capacity [19, 20] - however, in other areas with a more linear behavior or a focus on the remaining lifetime 
as opposed to the remaining functionality, it does not provide any advantage. Subsequently, SoH will therefore be 
used in the sense of SoHclass throughout this article. 
3. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
In order to present a comprehensive overview of the current state of research in the field of deep industrial transfer 
learning for fault prognostics, in this study, a two-stepped systematic literature review is conducted.  
In the first step, publications matching a combination of search terms are selected on Google Scholar. The search 
terms are listed in Table 1. One term of the category “term 1” and one term of the category “term 2” was selected 
for each search query.  
In the second step, a manual selection process further filtered those publications. Only full-text, English language, 
original research publications that utilized deep learning methods and some kind of transfer or continual learning 
on fault prognostics use cases and were published until the end of 2021 were to be included in the detailed analysis 
for this study. 
TABLE 1.  Search terms 
Term 1 
Term 2 
Transfer Learning 
Fault Prognostics 
Fault Prognosis 
Continual Learning 
Remaining Useful Lifetime 
State of Health 
4. RESULTS 
In this chapter, the results of the systematic literature review are presented. First, the original research publications, 
the methods and scenarios utilized therein are described. Then, open-access fault prognostics data sets suitable for 
deep industrial transfer learning are introduced.   
4.1 APPROACHES 
The publications matching the criteria described in section 3 are listed in TABLE 2. All of them are studies 
involving deep-learning-based transfer or continual learning on fault prognostics use cases. In the following, they 
are analyzed grouped by their transfer approach category. 
[32] uses domain-adaptation for semi-supervised RUL prediction. The described prototype combines long short-
term memory (LSTM) as feature extractor, an unspecified neural network as discriminator and fully connected 
neural networks (FCNN) as regressor. An evaluation on the NASA Turbofan data set demonstrates the positive 
transfer between source and target problems. The approach without transfer functionality was trained on the source 
problem only, because no labels should be necessary for training the target problem. Comparisons with other 
domain adaptation algorithms from [33] also revealed better performance of the presented algorithm. The 
prototype described in [34] uses a combination of convolutional neural networks (CNN) as feature extractor, 
FCNN as discriminator and FCNN as regressor. An evaluation on the NASA Milling data set demonstrates the 
positive transfer between source and target problem, especially when only a small number of target samples is 
used. However, because only a single transfer scenario is considered, the validity of the study is limited. 
[35] uses domain-adaptation for unsupervised RUL prediction. The described prototype combines stacked 
denoising autoencoders as domain adaptor and FCNN as regressor, where only the feature extractor is adapted to 
the target problem and the regressor remains fixed. Thus, an unsupervised adaptation of the supervised pre-trained 
algorithm to the target problem is possible. An evaluation on a proprietary, univariate milling data set consisting 
of vibration data demonstrates the positive transfer between source and target problems. The prototype described 
in [33] uses a combination of LSTM as feature extractor and FCNN as regressor and discriminator. An evaluation 
on the NASA Turbofan data set demonstrates the positive transfer between source and target problems, utilizing a 
separate hyperparameter optimization for each transfer scenario. A comparison with other unsupervised domain 
adaptation algorithms (including [36]) shows that the presented algorithm achieves higher accuracy and, 
additionally, a comparison with the supervised approach of [37] is also in its favor. Furthermore, the alternative 
use of FCNN, CNN or recurrent neural networks (RNN) as feature extractors is investigated, with the best overall 

A Survey on Deep Industrial Transfer Learning in Fault Prognostics 
5 
 
 
results obtained on an LSTM basis. In contrast, [30] uses a combination of FCNN and bidirectional gated recurrent 
units (GRU) as regressors. These are preceded by a feature extraction, which generates previously defined features 
from the time series signals, which are then checked for their domain invariance before further use. An evaluation 
on FEMTO-ST Bearing data set demonstrates the positive transfer between source and target problems. A 
comparison with other algorithms (among others [36, 38]) shows that the presented algorithm achieves a higher 
accuracy and that the special feature extraction heavily contributes to this. [38] describes a combination of CNN 
and FCNN as feature extractors, multi-kernel MMD as objective function for the adaption process and FCNN as 
regressor. An extensive evaluation is performed on the FEMTO-SE Bearing data set which, however, is only used 
in a univariate fashion after a fast Fourier transformation (FFT): At first, only considering the described prototype, 
the optimal parametrization of the objective function is investigated. It is shown that the MMD should be 
determined on features extracted as late as possible, i e. on the results of the feature extraction. By means of a 
comparison with learning algorithms of the same architecture but without transfer functionality and trained on 
labeled source, target or source and target samples, it is shown that the presented algorithm produces a positive 
transfer and also generalizes better. A final comparison with other algorithms, which however only sporadically 
use deep transfer learning, demonstrates that the presented algorithm achieves higher accuracy. In [39], the authors 
of [38] present two other approaches to unsupervised RUL prediction using domain adaptation - an adversarial 
approach and a non-adversarial one. Both prototypes described use a combination of CNN as feature extractor and 
FCNN as regressor. The non-adversarial approach is based on an extended loss function that considers the marginal 
probability distribution using multi-kernel MMD and the conditional probability distribution based on a fuzzy 
class division (analogous to SoH classes) in combination with MMD. The adversarial approach uses a modular 
discriminator for the marginal and conditional probability distributions, although their internal structures are not 
described in detail. Via a reverse validation based source sample selection, suitable source samples are identified 
before starting the actual adaptation process. On the XJTU-SY and FEMTO-ST Bearing data sets, a comprehensive 
evaluation is performed – again, on univariate time series of the FFT’ed raw data: By means of comparisons with 
learning algorithms of different architectures with and without transfer functionality and different training 
strategies, it is demonstrated that both algorithms presented produce a positive transfer as well as perform (in many 
cases significantly) better. On one data set, the non-adversarial approach comes out ahead, on the other the 
adversarial approach. The prototype described in [40] uses a combination of FCNN as feature extractor, multi-
kernel MMD as objective function for the adaptation process and kernel regression as regressor. An evaluation on 
FEMTO-ST data set demonstrates a positive transfer between source and target problem, although the overall 
predictive accuracy is rather low. Instead of using raw data, the spectral power density (PSD) is used as an input. 
A comparison with other algorithms (including [33] and [38]) shows that the presented algorithm achieves higher 
accuracy. However, it remains unclear on which numbers this comparison is based and the average values given 
for the presented approach are not taken from the publication itself. [41] describes a combination of CNN as feature 
extractor, FCNN as discriminator and FCNN as regressor. An evaluation on the FEMTO-ST data set demonstrates 
the better prediction quality of the algorithm compared to several other algorithms (among others [38]). Even 
though these other algorithms include one without transfer functionality, a direct evaluation of the transfer 
performance is not possible due to its different architecture. Instead, an investigation of the effect of different 
learning rates and kernel sizes is performed. Concludingly, [42] uses a combination of CNN and FCNN as feature 
extractors and FCNN as regressors. Via extensions of the loss functions for "healthy" and failure-prone samples 
(similar to SoH classes), a separate domain adaptation is performed for these two categories respectively. An 
evaluation on the NASA Turbofan and XJTU-SY Bearing data sets demonstrates a positive transfer between source 
and target problems. The influence of the transfer functionality is investigated for a conventional domain 
adaptation as well as for the proposed domain adaptation with separate treatment for different SoH classes. The 
proposed approach achieves the best results, but also requires a longer training time. 
[37] uses finetuning for supervised RUL prediction. The described prototype combines bidirectional LSTM as 
feature extractor and FCNN as regressor. An evaluation on the NASA Turbofan data set demonstrates the positive 
transfer between the source and target problems. It is observed that even in the case of larger differences between 
source and target problems, e.g., in terms of the number of operating or fault conditions, the transfer was mostly 
positive. [43] combines pre-trained CNN as feature extractor and own bidirectional LSTM and FCNN as regressor. 
An evaluation on the XYTU-SY Bearing data set and a Proprietary Gearbox data set, whose univariate time series 
are, however, both converted to images, demonstrates a positive transfer between the generic ImageNet data set as 
source problem and the aforementioned target problems. Moreover, the training time with transfer functionality is 
smaller than without. A comparison with other algorithms shows that the presented algorithm achieves higher 
accuracy. However, it remains unclear why the feature extractor is not adapted more to the present use case - for 
example, regarding the same image being processed three times because the pre-trained algorithm used has three 
input channels. Moreover, [44] compares different approaches of parameter transfer for supervised RUL 

6 
                                                       A Survey on Deep Industrial Transfer Learning in Fault Prognostics 
 
prediction. Based on an investigation of different deep learning methods without transfer functionality, a prototype 
combines LSTM and FCNN as regressors is described. An evaluation on a proprietary air compressor data set and 
the NASA Turbofan data set demonstrates a positive transfer between the source and target problems. Here, 
different approaches to parameter transfers, e. g. of sub-algorithms that can be finetuned as well as sub-algorithms 
whose parameters were kept static, were investigated. 
[45] uses a shared feature extractor with finetuning for supervised RUL prediction. The described prototype 
combines LSTM as feature extractor and FCNN as regressor, preserving the feature extractor without any changes 
and adapting only the regressor to the target problem, if necessary. This adaptation depends on the result of the 
Gray Relational Analysis [46] of handcrafted features of specific univariate time series of the source and target 
data set. An evaluation on the NASA and CALCE Battery data sets proves the positive transfer between source 
and target problems especially related to the period just before failure occurrence. Furthermore, the training time 
with transfer functionality is smaller than without. A comparison with other algorithms shows that the presented 
algorithm achieves a higher accuracy than other deep-learning-based algorithms but a lower accuracy than other 
non-deep-learning based algorithms. [47] also uses a shared feature extractor with finetuning, here in the form of 
a reduction of the MMD between the probability distributions of the source and target problems' extended loss 
function, for supervised, indirect RUL prediction.  Specifically, the wear of the cutting edge of cutting tools is 
determined directly, which is supposed to allow the indirect inference of the RUL. The described prototype 
combines a pre-trained CNN as feature extractor and a custom FCNN as regressor. Only the regressor is adapted 
to the target problem and the feature extractor remains unchanged. An evaluation on an industrial image data set 
returns a high accuracy value but does not provide any comparative results. Thus, neither an assessment of the 
relative performance nor of the transfer performance is possible. 
[27] uses regularization-based continual learning for supervised SoH estimation. The described prototype 
combines LSTM and FCNN as classifier. An evaluation on the NASA Turbofan data set demonstrates a positive, 
even multiple transfer between source and target problems. A strong dependence of the transfer performance on 
the similarity of source and target problems is described. [25] expands on those findings, using a similar 
architecture on the NASA Battery data set. Again, a positive, multiple transfer between source and target problems 
can be shown. However, the strong dependence of transfer performance on similarity, direction, sequence, and 
number of source and target problems, which has not yet been investigated in detail, is described as problematic 
as it naturally greatly influences the approach’s applicability. 
 
TABLE 2.  Overview of publications utilizing deep industrial transfer learning for fault prognostics 
Source 
Learning 
Category 
Problem 
Category 
Data Type(s) 
Data Set(s) 
Transfer Category 
Zhang 
et al. (2018) 
[37] 
Supervised 
RUL 
Multivar. Time 
Series 
NASA Turbofan 
Finetuning 
Sun et al. (2019) 
[35] 
Unsupervised 
RUL 
Univar. Time 
Series 
Proprietary Milling 
Domain Adaptation 
Da Costa et al. 
(2020) [33] 
Unsupervised 
RUL 
Multivar. Time 
Series 
NASA Turbofan 
Domain Adaptation 
Maschler et al. 
(2020) [27] 
Supervised 
SOHclass 
Multivar. Time 
Series 
NASA Turbofan 
Regularization 
Ragab et al. (2020) 
[32] 
Unsupervised 
RUL 
Multivar. Time 
Series 
NASA Turbofan 
Domain Adaptation 
Russell et al. (2020) 
[34] 
Semi-
supervised 
RUL 
Univar. Time 
Series 
NASA Milling 
Domain Adaptation 
Tan et al. (2020) 
[45] 
Supervised 
SOH% 
(Hand-crafted) 
Features 
NASA Battery; 
CALCE Battery 
Shared Feature 
Extractor plus 
Finetuning 
Zhang et al. (2020) 
[43] 
Supervised 
RUL 
(Self-generated) 
Images 
ImageNet; 
XJTU-SY Bearing; 
Proprietary Gearbox 
Finetuning 
Cao et al. (2021) 
[30] 
Unsupervised 
RUL 
Univar. Time 
Series 
FEMTO-ST Bearing 
Domain Adaptation 
Cheng et al. (2021) 
[38] 
Unsupervised 
RUL 
Univar. Time 
Series 
FEMTO-ST Bearing (FFT) 
Domain Adaptation 
Cheng et al. (2021) 
[39] 
Unsupervised 
RUL 
Univar. Time 
Series 
XJTU-SY Bearing (FFT); 
FEMTO-ST Bearing (FFT) 
Domain Adaptation 
Ding et al. (2021) 
[40] 
Unsupervised 
RUL 
Univar. Time 
Series 
FEMTO-ST Bearing (PSD) 
Domain Adaptation 
Gribbestad et al. 
(2021) [44] 
Supervised 
RUL 
Multivar. Time 
Series 
Proprietary Air Compressor; 
NASA Turbofan 
Parameter Transfer 

A Survey on Deep Industrial Transfer Learning in Fault Prognostics 
7 
 
 
Marei et al. (2021) 
[47] 
Supervised 
RUL 
Images 
Proprietary Milling 2 
Shared Feature 
Extractor plus 
Finetuning 
Maschler et al. 
(2021) [25] 
Supervised 
SOHclass 
(Hand-crafted) 
Features 
NASA Battery 
Regularization 
Zeng et al. (2021) 
[41] 
Unsupervised 
RUL 
Univar. Time 
Series 
FEMTO-ST Bearing 
Domain Adaptation 
Zhang et al. (2021) 
[42] 
Supervised 
RUL 
Multivar. Time 
Series 
NASA Turbofan; 
XJTU-SY Bearing 
Domain Adaptation 
4.2 DATA SETS 
In order to demonstrate the deep industrial transfer learning algorithms’ applicability to real-world problems, the 
data sets used need to reflect the complexity and dynamics of such problems. Therefore, the data sets used in the 
surveyed publications are listed in TABLE 3 – with the exception of proprietary data sets only accessible to some 
researchers and because of that not relevant to a wider audience. Two recently published data sets not yet used in 
publications were added in order to include them in the discussion in chapter 4. In the following, all listed data 
sets are described: 
For the NASA Milling data set [48], sixteen milling tools of unspecified type were run to failure on a MC-510V 
milling center under eight different operating conditions characterized by different depth of cut, feed rate and 
material. Acoustic emissions, vibrations and current are recorded with 250 Hz resulting in approximately 1.5 
million multivariate samples. 
For the NASA Bearing data set [49], twelve bearings Rexnord ZA-2115 were run to failure with four being 
simultaneously on the same shaft but subject to different radial forces. Horizontal and vertical (for some bearings 
only one) acceleration signals are recorded with 20 kHz for approximately 1 second of every tenth minute, resulting 
in approximately 15.5 million multivariate (bi- respectively univariate if only one bearing is used) samples. 
However, because the experiments were stopped once one bearing became faulty, there are exact RUL labels for 
only four bearings (one experiment encountered a double fault). 
For the NASA Battery data set [50], 34 type 18650 lithium-ion battery cells were run to failure under 34 different 
operating conditions characterized by different ambient temperatures, discharge modes and stopping conditions. 
For each (dis-)charging cycle, static sensor values as well as different time series at 1 Hz, e. g. battery voltage, 
current and temperature, are recorded. Therefore, there are two levels of multivariate time series contained in this 
data set. The total number of samples is approximately 7.3 million multivariate samples. However, failures of 
measurement equipment for some of the batteries as well as other anomalies lead to a lower number of labeled and 
usable samples [25]. 
For the NASA Turbofan data set [51], 1,416 virtual turbofan engines were run to failure under six different 
operating conditions characterized by altitude, throttle resolver angle and speed using the so-called Commercial 
Modular Aero-Propulsion System Simulation (C-MAPSS). 26 different sensor values are recorded as snapshots 
once per simulated flight resulting in 265,256 multivariate samples. 
The CALCE Battery data set [52] is an extensive collection of run-to-failure experiments on different types of 
batteries. The only study included in this survey utilizing some of this data is [45] – we will therefore focus on the 
“CS2” data set used there. It consists of data from thirteen lithium-ion batteries run to failure under six different 
operating conditions characterized by different discharge currents and different cut-off voltages. Six different 
electric sensor values are recorded approximately every 30 seconds resulting in 8.4 million multivariate samples. 
Two more lithium-ion batteries were also measured, however, the measured characteristics are different from the 
others and therefore excluded in this overview. 
For the FEMTO-ST Bearing data set [53], seventeen bearings were run to failure under three different operating 
conditions characterized by different rotating speeds and different radial force. Horizontal and vertical acceleration 
signals are recorded with 25.6 kHz 0.1 seconds every 10 seconds and (for only thirteen specimens) temperature 
signals with 10 Hz, resulting in approximately 63.7 million multivariate samples.  
After a multi-year period without the release of major new data sets used in transfer learning studies, recent years 
finally brought a new wave of larger, more complex data sets: 
For the XJTU-SY Bearing data set [22], five heavy duty bearings LDK UER204 each were run to failure under 
three different operating conditions characterized by different rotating speeds and different radial force. Horizontal 
and vertical acceleration signals are recorded with 25.6 kHz for 1.28 seconds of every minute, resulting in 
approximately 302 million bivariate samples. Usually, only the horizontal acceleration is used for fault prediction.    

8 
                                                       A Survey on Deep Industrial Transfer Learning in Fault Prognostics 
 
To the best of our knowledge, the following two newest data sets have not been used in published transfer learning 
studies yet. However, due to their complexity, they appear highly suitable for transfer learning evaluation scenarios 
and should therefore be brought to the community’s attention: 
The NASA Turbofan 2 data set [54] features a high number of non-trivial data dimensions and thereby provides a 
highly complex problem scenario. For this data set, nine virtual turbofan engines were run to failure using C-
MAPSS parametrized by real flight data. Seven engines had similar operating conditions, whereas two had 
individual operating conditions. 45 different sensor values are recorded with 1 Hz resulting in 6.5 million 
multivariate samples. 
The US Relays data set [55] features a high number of operating conditions, specimens and samples and thereby 
provides highly complex problem scenario. For this data set, 100 electromechanical relays of 5 different types 
were run to failure under 22 different operating conditions characterized by different supply voltages and different 
load resistances. For each switching cycle, a number of static sensor values as well as voltage time series were 
recorded. Therefore, there are two levels of multivariate time series contained in this data set. The total number of 
samples is approximately 162.5 million multivariate samples. 
 
TABLE 3.  Overview of fault prognostics data sets used in deep industrial transfer learning publications 
Source 
Data Set Name 
Data Type(s) 
No. of Operating 
Conditions 
No. of 
Specimens 
No. of 
Samples* 
Agogino et al. (2007) 
[48] 
NASA Milling 
Multivariate Time Series 
8 
16 
1,503,000 
Lee et al. (2007) [49] 
NASA Bearing 
Multivariate** Time Series 
3 
12 
15,540,224 
Saxena et al. (2007) 
[50] 
NASA Battery 
Multivariate Time Series 
34 
34 
7,282,946 
Saxena et al. (2008) 
[51] 
NASA Turbofan 
Multivariate Time Series 
6 
1,416 
265,256 
CALCE (2011) [52] 
CALCE Battery 
Multivariate Time Series 
6 
13 
8,438,937 
Nectoux et al. (2012) 
[53] 
FEMTO-ST 
Bearing 
Multivariate Time Series 
3 
17 
63.718.828 
Wang et al. (2020) [22] 
XJTU-SY Bearing 
Bivariate Time Series 
3 
15 
302,000,000 
Arias Chao et al. (2021) 
[54] 
NASA Turbofan 2 
Multivariate Time Series 
3 
9 
6,500,000 
Maschler et al. (2022) 
[55] 
US Relays 
Multivariate Time Series 
22 
100 
162,500,000 
*      Samples are defined as individual data tuples measured at respectively representing a different time or using a different measurement 
object than any other data tuple. If the data set differentiates between test, validation or training data, this differentiation is ignored 
here and the maximum number of unique samples considered. 
**   The time series are multivariate for sets of four bearings and bi- respectively univariate for individual bearings. 
5. DISCUSSION 
In this chapter, the results of the systematic literature review are discussed and further analyzed. First, learnings 
and best practices are derived from the original research publications in order to consolidate the current state of 
research in this field. Then, open-access fault prognostics data sets are examined and suitable ones for 
benchmarking identified.   
5.1 APPROACHES 
The presented approaches all belong to the solution categories of feature representation and parameter transfer of 
transfer learning and the regularization strategies of continual learning, which, however, methodically represent a 
form of parameter transfer (see chapter 2.1). Various deep learning methods are utilized, from simple FCNNs and 
RNNs of various forms to autoencoders or complex, pre-trained CNNs such as AlexNet or ResNet.  
As input data type, primarily time series data is used, which is typical for industrial applications. Only 
occasionally are features, image or meta data used directly [25, 43, 45, 47]. Only some of the presented approaches 
process multivariate time series [27, 32, 33, 37, 42, 44] and no approach uses different types of data in parallel. 
The complexity of the scenarios used for evaluation is therefore still low, lacking evidence for the applicability of 
the approaches presented towards more diverse and dynamic real-life scenarios. 
Most of the publications presented use only a single data set for evaluation. Only [42–45] evaluate their algorithm 
on different, similar data sets and no study uses evaluation data sets with different data types. Thus, statements 
about the transferability of the approaches presented are based upon only thin evidence, ready-to-use architectures 
or frameworks are not available, yet.  

A Survey on Deep Industrial Transfer Learning in Fault Prognostics 
9 
 
 
Only two of the publications presented address SoHclass estimation [25, 27] for fault prognostics, which makes it 
a fringe approach. Direct RUL prediction is much more prominently represented, marking it the default problem 
category in the field of fault prognostics. 
The results of some publications are not well enough documented to allow a clear evaluation of the presented 
approaches’ performance. This may be due to a lack of comparative values [34, 41, 47] or their insufficient 
documentation [40]. [43] appears unfinished due to the generic input data treatment which is not adapted to the 
use case. In general, although six studies make use of the NASA Turbofan data set and five utilize the FEMTO-
ST bearing data set and, thereby, allow benchmarking to some degree, the field would benefit from ubiquitous 
comparability based upon a common set of benchmarking algorithms and well-documented methodologies as well 
as evaluation results. This would greatly increase the identification of generalizable best practices and by this speed 
up scientific progress [1, 4]. 
Future research should build upon the following findings: The appropriate selection of source data to be used in 
a transfer increases said transfer’s performance [30]. Furthermore, [42] shows that a separate treatment of different 
sample clusters, e.g. of previously known sub-scenarios, increases a transfer’s performance as well. Regularization 
approaches, however, do not appear suitable due to their complex dependencies [25, 27]. Regarding the use of 
vibration data, utilizing preprocessed data (e.g. FFT) improves results compared to utilizing raw data. 
5.2 DATA SETS 
The data sets used in the presented publications are predominantly open-access, with only four exceptions in [4, 
43, 44, 47]. Due to their low accessibility, proprietary data sets obviously are unsuitable for benchmarking 
purposes and should be accompanied by the use of open-access data sets in any high-impact publication. 
So far, the NASA Ames Research Center has provided most of the open-access data sets used for research in the 
field of industrial transfer learning for fault prognostics – notably, the FEMTO-ST data set is made available 
through their repository as well. The most widely used data sets were promoted by the Prognostics and Health 
Management (PHM) challenges of 2008 [51] and 2021 [53]. It is plausible that [54] will encounter a similar effect 
by the PHM challenge of 2021. Contests like the PHM challenges facilitate comparability of approaches and results 
by forcing the participants to use the same data sets for evaluation. Furthermore, institutional repositories such as 
NASA Ames’ data repository increase the chance of the contained data sets’ long-term availability compared to 
private or individual university chairs’ websites. Both aspects, wide-spread usage and long-term availability, 
are qualities required by a benchmark data set. 
Apart from those meta-criteria, a benchmark data set should reflect the challenges typical for the respective 
application or usage scenario. In this case, they should therefore be heterogenous and dynamic, ideally consisting 
of (many) different data dimensions, operating conditions and specimen while providing a high number of samples 
to train and evaluate algorithms on. Even if the sub-problem to be solved by an algorithm does not in itself require 
the full complexity, using a very complex data set will allow comparability with a wider array of other publications 
and should therefore be preferable to a data set of lesser complexity. These criteria are best met by the two newest 
data sets presented in [54, 55]. 
6. CONCLUSION 
Fault prognostics is of great importance, e.g. in reducing downtime in manufacturing, harm by failures or wastage 
by premature maintenance, and deep-learning-based approaches show promising results in research environments. 
However, in order to be applicable to the heterogenous and dynamic nature of real-world industrial scenarios, deep 
industrial transfer learning capabilities are required to lower the effort of data collection and algorithm adaptation 
to new (sub-)problems. 
This article introduces transfer learning’s main approaches of feature representation and parameter transfer as well 
as continual learning’s regularization strategy. It then describes the basics of fault prognostics regarding different 
approaches and different objectives. The systematic literature review presents a comprehensive overview of the 
approaches published on the topic of fault prognostics by deep industrial transfer learning. Despite the diverse 
array of approaches, results and applications, there is a lack of comparability. Still, some best practices e.g. 
regarding source data selection and handling can be identified. An ensuing review of open-access data sets for 
fault prognostics by deep industrial transfer learning underlines the availability of a variety of such data sets. 
However, only some of them provide the complexity necessary to allow the full range of transfer scenarios – and 
only those are fully suitable for benchmarking purposes. Luckily, after a few years without new data sets, there 
have recently been notable publications.  

10 
                                                       A Survey on Deep Industrial Transfer Learning in Fault Prognostics 
 
Thereby, this article provides a range of state-of-the-art examples and analyses for anyone considering to enter the 
field of fault prognostics by deep industrial transfer learning.
