Reverse-Engineering Satire, or
“Paper on Computational Humor Accepted despite Making Serious Advances”
Robert West*
EPFL

Eric Horvitz
Microsoft Research

Abstract
Humor is an essential human trait. Efforts to understand hu-
mor have called out links between humor and the foundations
of cognition, as well as the importance of humor in social en-
gagement. As such, it is a promising and important subject of
study, with relevance for artiﬁcial intelligence and human–
computer interaction. Previous computational work on hu-
mor has mostly operated at a coarse level of granularity, e.g.,
predicting whether an entire sentence, paragraph, document,
etc., is humorous. As a step toward deep understanding of
humor, we seek ﬁne-grained models of attributes that make a
given text humorous. Starting from the observation that satir-
ical news headlines tend to resemble serious news headlines,
we build and analyze a corpus of satirical headlines paired
with nearly identical but serious headlines. The corpus is con-
structed via Unfun.me, an online game that incentivizes play-
ers to make minimal edits to satirical headlines with the goal
of making other players believe the results are serious head-
lines. The edit operations used to successfully remove humor
pinpoint the words and concepts that play a key role in mak-
ing the original, satirical headline funny. Our analysis reveals
that the humor tends to reside toward the end of headlines,
and primarily in noun phrases, and that most satirical head-
lines follow a certain logical pattern, which we term false
analogy. Overall, this paper deepens our understanding of the
syntactic and semantic structure of satirical news headlines
and provides insights for building humor-producing systems.
1
Introduction
Humor is a uniquely human trait that plays an essential role
in our everyday lives and interactions. Psychologists have
pointed out the role of humor in human cognition, includ-
ing its link to the identiﬁcation of surprising connections
in learning and problem solving, as well as the importance
of humor in social engagement (Martin 2010). Humor is a
promising area for studies of intelligence and its automa-
tion: it is hard to imagine a computer passing a rich Turing
test without being able to understand and produce humor. As
computers increasingly take on conversational tasks (e.g., in
chat bots and personal assistants), the ability to interact with
users naturally is gaining importance, but human–computer
interactions will never be truly natural without giving users
*Research done partly at Microsoft Research.
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
g
h
h′
h′
Task 1:
Unfun the headline!
Task 2:
Real or not?
RA(h,h′)
RB(g)
A
B
Satirical
headlines
Real 
headlines
Modiﬁed
satirical
1
2
3
3
God diagnosed with bipolar disorder
Words changed: 2
serious
satirical
satirical
Obama elected president
serious
Figure 1: Unfun.me, a game for building a corpus of pairs
(h,h′) of satirical and similar-but-serious-looking headlines.
Numbers: order of steps. Screenshots: running example (h =
God diagnosed with bipolar disorder; h′ = Bob Dylan diag-
nosed with bipolar disorder; g = Obama elected president).
the option to say something funny and have it understood
that way; e.g., recent work has shown that misunderstanding
of playful quips can be the source of failures in conversa-
tional dialog in open-world interaction (Andrist et al. 2016).
Given how tied humor is to the human condition, the
phenomenon has challenged some of the greatest thinkers
throughout history and has been the subject of much aca-
demic research across over 20 disciplines (Raskin 2008), in-
cluding computer science (Binsted et al. 2006), where re-
searchers have developed algorithms for detecting, analyz-
ing, and generating humorous utterances (cf. Sec. 6).
The automated analysis of humor is complicated by the
fact that most humorous texts have a complex narrative
structure that is difﬁcult to disentangle; e.g., typical jokes—
the type of humorous text studied most in the literature—
carefully set the stage to build certain expectations in the au-
dience, which are then turned upside down in the punchline.
To circumvent the difﬁculties imposed by narrative struc-
ture, we focus on a speciﬁc humorous genre: satirical news.
Satirical news articles, on the surface, mimic the format typ-
ical of mainstream journalism, but unlike serious news ar-
ticles, they do not aim to relate facts, but rather to ridicule
individuals, groups, or society. Crucially, though, satirical
news stories are typically written headline-ﬁrst: only if the
arXiv:1901.03253v3  [cs.AI]  13 Aug 2019

headline is funny in and of itself is the rest of the story writ-
ten (Glass 2008). This is markedly different from real news
stories and means that satirical news headlines can be stud-
ied in isolation from the full stories, whose essence they con-
vey in a concise form with minimal narrative structure.
An additional advantage of satirical headlines is that they
mimic the formulaic style of serious news headlines, which
limits their syntactic variability and allows us to better con-
trol for syntax and focus on semantics. Moreover, satirical
headlines are similar to serious news headlines not only in
style but also in content: changing a single word often suf-
ﬁces to make a satirical headline sound like serious news.
Running example. For instance, changing God to Bob Dy-
lan turns the satirical headline God diagnosed with bipo-
lar disorder, which was published in the satirical newspaper
The Onion, into Bob Dylan diagnosed with bipolar disor-
der, which could appear verbatim in a serious newspaper.
A large corpus of such pairs of satirical and similar-but-
serious-looking headlines would open up exciting opportu-
nities for humor research. For instance, it would allow us to
understand why a satirical text is funny at a ﬁner granular-
ity than previously possible, by identifying the exact words
that make the difference between serious and funny. This
is a striking difference from most previous research, where
usually the average satirical headline is compared to the av-
erage serious one (Mihalcea and Pulman 2007). Moreover,
while the principal goal of this research has been to achieve
new insights about humor, we also imagine new applica-
tions. For example, if we attained a grasp on the precise dif-
ferences between satirical and serious headlines, we might
be able to create procedures for transforming real news
headlines into satirical headlines with minimal changes.
To create an aligned corpus, a ﬁrst idea would be to au-
tomatically pair satirical with serious news headlines: start
with a satirical headline and ﬁnd the most similar serious
headline written around the same time. It is hard to imagine,
though, that this process would yield many pairs of high lex-
ical and syntactic similarity. An alternative idea would be to
use crowdsourcing: show serious headlines to humans and
ask them to turn them into satirical headlines via minimal
edits. Unfortunately, this task requires a level of creative tal-
ent that few people have. Even at The Onion, America’s most
prominent satirical newspaper, only 16 of 600 headlines gen-
erated each week (less than 3%) are accepted (Glass 2008).
The crucial observation is that the task is much easier in
the reverse direction: it is typically straightforward to re-
move the humor from a satirical headline by applying small
edits that turn the headline into one that looks serious and
could conceivably be published in a real news outlet. In other
words, reversing the creative effort that others have already
invested in crafting a humorous headline requires much less
creativity than crafting the headline in the ﬁrst place. We
thus adopt this reverse-crowdsourcing approach, by design-
ing a game with a purpose (von Ahn and Dabbish 2008).
The game is called Unfun.me and is described graphi-
cally in Fig. 1. A player A of the game is given a satirical
news headline h and asked to modify it in order to fool other
players into believing that the result h′ is a real headline from
a serious news outlet. The reward RA(h,h′) received by the
player A who modiﬁed the satirical headline increases with
the fraction of other players rating the modiﬁed headline h′
as serious and decreases with the number of words changed
in the original headline h.
Contributions. Our main contributions are twofold. First,
we present Unfun.me, an online game for collecting a cor-
pus of pairs of satirical news headlines aligned to similar-
but-serious-looking headlines (Sec. 2). Second, our analy-
sis of these pairs (Sec. 3–5) reveals key properties of satiri-
cal headlines at a much ﬁner level of granularity than prior
work (Sec. 6). Syntactically (Sec. 4), we conclude that the
humor tends to reside in noun phrases, and with increased
likelihood toward the end of headlines, giving rise to what
we term “micro-punchlines”. Semantically (Sec. 5), we ob-
serve that original and modiﬁed headlines are usually op-
posed to each other along certain dimensions crucial to the
human condition (e.g., high vs. low stature, life vs. death),
and that satirical headlines are overwhelmingly constructed
according to a false-analogy pattern. We conclude the pa-
per by discussing our ﬁndings in the context of established
theories of humor (Sec. 7).
2
Game description: Unfun.me
Here we introduce Unfun.me, our game for collecting pairs
of satirical and similar-but-serious-looking headlines. The
game, available online at http://unfun.me and visu-
ally depicted in Fig. 1, challenges players in two tasks.
Task 1: Unfun the headline! This is the core task where the
reverse-engineering of satire happens (left panel in Fig. 1). A
player, A, is given a satirical headline h and is asked to turn
it into a headline h′ that could conceivably have been pub-
lished by a serious news outlet, by changing as few words as
possible.
Task 2: Real or not? Whether on purpose or not, player A
may have done a bad job in task 1, and h′ may still be hu-
morous. Detecting and ﬁltering such cases is the purpose of
task 2 (right panel in Fig. 1), where h′ is shown to another
player, B, who is asked to indicate her belief pB(h′) that h′
comes from a serious news outlet using a slider bar ranging
from 0% to 100%. We shall refer to pB(h′) as B’s serious-
ness rating of h′. For reasons that will become clear below,
player B also indicates her belief pB(g) for a second, unmod-
iﬁed headline g (unrelated to h) that originates from either a
serious or a satirical news outlet. The two headlines h′ and g
are presented in random order, in order to avoid biases.
For the purpose of incentivizing players to make high-
quality contributions, we reward them as follows.
Reward for task 1. As player A is supposed to remove
the humor from h via a minimal modiﬁcation, his reward
RA(h,h′) increases (1) with the average rating r(h′) that the
modiﬁed headline h′ receives from all n players B1,...,Bn
who rate it and (2) with the similarity s(h,h′) of h and h′:
RA(h,h′) =
p
r(h′) s(h,h′) ,
(1)
where r(h′) = 1
n
n
X
i=1
pBi(h′),
s(h,h′) = 1−
d(h,h′)
max{|h|,|h′|},

where, in turn, |x| is the number of tokens (i.e., words)
in a string x, and d(h,h′), the token-based edit distance
(Navarro 2001) between h and h′, i.e., the minimum num-
ber of insertions, deletions, and substitutions by which h can
be transformed into h′, considering as the basic units of a
string its tokens, rather than its characters. The geometric
mean was chosen in Eq. 1 because it is zero whenever one
of the two factors is zero (which is not true for the more
standard arithmetic mean): a modiﬁed headline that seems
very serious, but has nothing to do with the original, should
not receive any points, nor should a headline that is nearly
identical to the original, but retains all its humor.
Reward for task 2. Since player B’s very purpose is to
determine whether h′ is without humor, we do not have a
ground-truth rating for h′. In order to still be able to reward
player B for participating in task 2, and to incentivize her to
indicate her true opinion about h′, we also ask her for her be-
lief pB(g) regarding a headline g for which we do have the
ground truth of “serious” vs. “satirical”. The reward RB(g)
that player B receives for rating headline g is then
RB(g) =
log(pB(g))
if g is serious,
log(1−pB(g))
if g is satirical.
(2)
Note that this is a proper scoring rule (Gneiting and Raftery
2007), i.e., player B maximizes her expected reward by in-
dicating her true belief. This would not be true for the more
straightforward scoring formula without logarithms, which
would drive players to report beliefs of 0 or 1 instead of their
true beliefs. Also, as h′ and g are shown in random order, B
does not know which is which, and her optimal strategy is to
indicate her true belief on both.
Overall game ﬂow. Whenever a user wants to play, we gen-
erate a type-1 task with probability α = 1/3 and a type-2 task
with probability 1 −α = 2/3, such that we can collect two
ratings per modiﬁed headline. As mentioned, ratings from
task 2 can serve as a ﬁlter, and we can increase its precision
at will by decreasing α. To make rewards more intuitive and
give more weight to the core task 1, we translate and scale
rewards such that RA(·,·) ∈[0,1000] and RB(·) ∈[0,200].
We also implemented additional incentive mechanisms such
as badges, high-score tables, and immediate rewards for par-
ticipating, but we omit the details for space reasons.
Satirical and serious headlines. The game requires corpora
of satirical as well as serious news headlines as input. Our
satirical corpus consists of 9,159 headlines published by the
well-known satirical newspaper The Onion; our serious cor-
pus, of 9,000 headlines drawn from 9 major news websites.
Data and code. We make the data collected via Unfun.me,
as well as our code for analyzing it, publicly available online
(West and Horvitz 2019).
3
Analysis of game dynamics
Via Unfun.me, we have collected 2,801 modiﬁed versions h′
for 1,191 distinct satirical headlines h (2.4 pairs per satirical
headline). All but 7 modiﬁed headlines have received at least
one rating, and 1,806 (64%), at least two (mean/median: 2
ratings per modiﬁed headline). The modiﬁed headlines (rat-
ings) came from 582 (546) unique user ids (mean/median:
4.8/2 modiﬁed headlines per user; 10/4 ratings per user).
We start by analyzing the edit operations players perform
in task 1 and the seriousness ratings they provide in task 2.
The main objects of study are pairs (h,h′) consisting of an
original satirical headline h and a modiﬁed version h′, which
we shall simply call pairs in what follows.
Edit distance. The ﬁrst interesting question is how much
players tend to modify original satirical headlines h in or-
der to expunge the humor from them. We quantify this no-
tion via the token-based edit distance d(h,h′) between the
satirical headline h and the modiﬁed version h′ (cf. Sec. 2).
Fig. 2(a), which plots the distribution of edit distance, shows
that very small edits are most common, as incentivized by
the reward structure of the game (Eq. 1). In particular, 33%
of all pairs have the smallest possible edit distance of 1, and
57% (69%) have a distance up to 2 (3).
Tradeoff of edit distance vs. seriousness rating. The re-
ward structure of the game (Eq. 1) does not, however, ex-
clusively encourage small edits. Rather, there is a tradeoff:
larger edits (bad) make it easier to remove the humor (good),
while smaller edits (good) run the risk of not fully removing
the humor (bad). Fig. 2(b), which plots the mean average se-
riousness rating r(h′) of modiﬁed headlines h′ as a function
of the edit distance d(h,h′), shows how this tradeoff plays
out in practice. For edit distances between 1 and 5 (83%
of all pairs, cf. Fig. 2(a)), seriousness ratings correlate pos-
itively with edit distance. In particular, it seems harder to
remove the humor by changing one word than by changing
two words, whereas the marginal effect is negligible when
allowing for even larger edits. The positive correlation does
not hold for the much smaller number (17%) of pairs with an
edit distance above 5. Inspecting the data, we ﬁnd that this
is caused by headlines so inherently absurd that even large
edits cannot manage to remove the humor from them.
Seriousness ratings. Recall that, in task 2, players attribute
seriousness ratings to modiﬁed headlines h′, as well as to
unmodiﬁed serious or satirical headlines g. We ﬁnd that, in
all three cases, the distribution of seriousness ratings is bi-
modal, with extreme values close to 0 or 1 being most com-
mon. Hence, we binarize ratings into two levels, “satirical”
(rating below 0.5) and “serious” (rating above 0.5).
In order to see how people rate serious, satirical, and mod-
iﬁed headlines, respectively, Table 1 aggregates ratings by
headline (considering only the 1,806 headlines with at least
two ratings) and splits the headlines into three groups: “con-
sensus serious” (over 50% “serious” ratings), “no consen-
sus” (exactly 50%), and “consensus satirical” (under 50%).
We make two observations. First, modiﬁed headlines h′
(column 3 of Table 1) are distributed roughly evenly over
the three groups; i.e., there are about as many headlines from
which the humor has been successfully removed (“consen-
sus serious”) as not (“consensus satirical”). The most useful
modiﬁed headlines for our purposes are those from the “con-
sensus serious” group, as they likely do not carry the humor
of the original h anymore. Hence, we shall restrict our subse-

1
3
5
7
9
11
13
Token−based edit distance
0
200
600
Number of pairs
0.0
0.4
0.8
Cumulative rel. frequency
(a)
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Token−based edit distance
Mean avg. seriousness rating
(b)
Insertion
Deletion
Substit.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Relative frequency
All pairs
Pairs with edit dist. 1
(c)
1
3
5
7
Chunk−based edit distance
0
50
150
250
Number of pairs
0.0
0.4
0.8
Cumulative rel. frequency
(d)
Figure 2: (a) Distribution of token-based edit distance in headline pairs collected via Unfun.me. (b) Tradeoff of edit distance
vs. seriousness rating (only pairs with at least 2 ratings; with bootstrapped 95% conﬁdence intervals). (c) Distribution of token-
based edit operations (successful pairs only, cf. Sec. 3). (d) Distribution of chunk-based edit distance (successful pairs only).
Table 1: Rating distributions for pairs with at least 2 ratings.
“No consensus” large as most pairs have exactly 2 ratings.
Aggregate rating
Serious
Satirical
Modiﬁed
Consensus serious
777 (57%)
105 (8%)
654 (36%)
No consensus
447 (33%)
368 (27%)
570 (32%)
Consensus satirical
133 (10%)
871 (65%)
582 (32%)
quent analyses to the corresponding 654 successful pairs.1
Second, the ratings are heavily skewed toward the ground
truth for unmodiﬁed serious (column 1) and satirical (col-
umn 2) headlines; i.e., players can typically well distinguish
serious from satirical headlines (but cf. discussion in Sec. 7).
Insertions, deletions, substitutions. When computing the
edit distance d(h,h′) using dynamic programming, we can
also keep track of an optimal sequence of edit operations
(insertions, deletions, substitutions) for transforming h into
h′ (Navarro 2001). In Fig. 2(c), we plot the distribution of
edit operations, macro-averaged over all pairs. We see that
substitutions clearly dominate (61%), followed by deletions
(34%), with insertions being very rare (5%).
Pairs with edit distance 1 are particularly interesting, as
they are the most similar, as well as the most frequent
(Fig. 2(a), footnote 1). Also, the optimal edit sequence may
not be unique in general, but for edit distance 1 it is. Hence,
Fig. 2(c) also displays the distribution over edit operations
for pairs with edit distance 1 only. Here, substitutions domi-
nate even more (77%), and insertions are even rarer (2%).
Reversing the direction of the editing process, we hence
conclude that writers of satirical headlines tend to work
overwhelmingly by substituting words in (hypothetical) sim-
ilar-but-serious headlines, and to a certain degree by adding
words, but very rarely by deleting words.
4
Syntactic analysis of aligned corpus
Next, we go one level deeper and ask: what parts of a satir-
ical headline should be modiﬁed in order to remove the hu-
mor from it, or conversely, what parts of a serious headline
should be modiﬁed in order to add humor? We ﬁrst tackle
this question from a syntactic perspective, before moving to
a deeper, semantic perspective in Sec. 5.
1 As a sanity check, we computed the edit-distance distribution
for successful pairs only, ﬁnding no big differences from Fig. 2(a).
From tokens to chunks. We analyze syntax at an interme-
diate level of abstraction between simple sequences of part-
of-speech (POS) tags and complex parse trees, by relying on
a chunker (also called shallow parser). We use OpenNLP’s
maximum entropy chunker (Berger, Pietra, and Pietra 1996),
after retraining it to better handle pithy, headline-style text.
The chunker takes POS-tagged text as input and groups sub-
sequent tokens into meaningful phrases (chunks) without
inferring the recursive structure of parse trees; e.g., our run-
ning example (Sec. 1) is chunked as [NP Bob Dylan] [VP
diagnosed] [PP with] [NP bipolar disorder] (chunk labels
expanded in Table 2). Chunks are handy because they ab-
stract away low-level details; e.g., changing God to Bob Dy-
lan requires a token-based edit distance of 2, but a chunk-
based distance of only 1, where the latter is more desirable
because it more closely captures the conceptual modiﬁcation
of one entity being replaced by another entity.
Chunking all 9,159 original headlines from our The Onion
corpus, we ﬁnd the most frequent chunk pattern to be NP VP
NP PP NP (4.8%; e.g., H2 in Fig. 4(a)), followed by NP VP
NP (4.3%; e.g., H4) and NP VP PP NP (3.3%; e.g., H9).
To control for syntactic effects, it is useful to study a large
number of pairs (h,h′) where all original headlines h follow
a ﬁxed syntactic pattern. We therefore gave priority to head-
lines of the most frequent pattern (NP VP NP PP NP) for a
certain time period when sampling satirical headlines as in-
put to task 1, such that, out of all 2,801 (h,h′) pairs collected
in task 1, h follows that pattern in 21% of all cases.
Chunk-based edit distance. Recomputing edit distances at
the chunk level, rather than the token level, we obtain the
chunk-based edit distance distribution of Fig. 2(d). It resem-
bles the token-based edit distance distribution of Fig. 2(a),
with the difference that the smallest possible distance of 1
is even more prevalent (52% vs. 33% of pairs), due to the
fact that modifying a single chunk frequently corresponds to
modifying multiple tokens. Since, moreover, the vast major-
ity (97%) of all single-chunk edits are substitutions, we now
focus on 254 (h,h′) pairs where exactly one chunk of h has
been modiﬁed (henceforth single-substitution pairs). This
accounts for about half of all successful pairs (after discard-
ing pairs that were problematic for the chunker).
Dominance of noun phrases. We now ask which syntac-
tic chunk types (noun phrases, verb phrases, etc.) are mod-
iﬁed to remove humor. In doing so, we need to be careful,

Table 2: Distribution of syntactic chunk types in single-sub-
stitution pairs (only showing types modiﬁed at least once).
Label
Chunk type
Modiﬁed
Prior
Lift
NP
Noun phrase
89.37%
58.63%
1.52
VP
Verb phrase
9.45%
20.15%
0.47
ADJP
Adjective phrase
0.79%
1.49%
0.53
PP
Preposition
0.39%
17.40%
0.02
1
2
3
0.0
0.3
0.6
Chunk position
Relative frequency
1
2
3
4
0.0
0.3
0.6
Chunk position
1
2
3
4
5
0.0
0.3
0.6
Chunk position
1
2
3
4
5
6
0.0
0.3
0.6
Chunk position
Empirical
Random
Figure 3: Distributions of modiﬁed chunk positions in sin-
gle-substitution pairs, for original headlines containing 3 to
6 chunks (number of pairs for each length: 24, 38, 123, 38).
as some chunk types are more common a priori than oth-
ers; e.g., 59% of all chunks in original satirical headlines
are noun phrases, 20%, verb phrases, etc. We therefore com-
pare the empirical distribution of modiﬁed chunks with this
prior distribution, via the ratio of the two (termed lift). Ta-
ble 2 shows that noun phrases constitute 89% of the modi-
ﬁed chunks (lift 1.52), whereas all other chunk types are less
frequent than under the prior. We conclude that the humor of
satirical news headlines tends to reside in noun phrases.
Micro-punchlines. We now ask where in terms of location
within a headline the humor tends to reside. To answer this
question, we compute the position of the modiﬁed chunk in
each headline’s chunk sequence and plot the distribution of
modiﬁed positions in Fig. 3. We see that, regardless of head-
line length, modiﬁcations to the last chunk are particularly
overrepresented.2 This is an important ﬁnding: we have pre-
viously (Sec. 1) argued that satirical headlines consist of a
punchline only, with minimal narrative structure, and indeed
it was this very intuition that led us to investigate headlines
in isolation. Given Fig. 3, we need to revise this statement
slightly: although satirical headlines consist of a single sen-
tence, they are often structured—at a micro-level—akin to
more narrative jokes, where the humorous effect also comes
with the very last words. Put differently, the ﬁnal words of
satirical headlines often serve as a “micro-punchline”.3
5
Semantic analysis of aligned corpus
After characterizing aligned pairs syntactically, we now
move to the semantic level. We ﬁrst analyze the aligned pairs
obtained from Unfun.me and later discuss our ﬁndings in the
broader context of established theories of humor (Sec. 7).
Example. Before a more general analysis, let us ﬁrst con-
sider again our running example (Sec. 1), God diagnosed
with bipolar disorder. This satirical headline works by
2We ascertained that the effect is not due to trailing chunks po-
tentially being (1) longer and (2) more likely to be noun phrases.
3Strictly speaking, the ﬁndings of Sec. 4 only pertain to satirical
headlines that are already similar to hypothetical serious headlines,
due to selection bias (we only study headlines that players of Un-
fun.me chose to modify) and due to our focus on single-substitution
pairs (about 50% of successful pairs).
blending two realms that are fundamentally opposed—the
human and the divine—by talking about God as a human.
Although the literally described situation is impossible (God
is perfect and cannot possibly have a disease), the line still
makes sense by expressing a crucial commonality between
bipolar humans and God, namely that both may act unpre-
dictably. But for humans, being unpredictable (due to bipo-
larity) is a sign of imperfection, whereas for God it is a sign
of perfection (“The Lord moves in mysterious ways”), and
it is this opposition that makes the line humorous.
The main advantage of our aligned corpus is that it lets
us generalize this ad-hoc analysis of a particular example to
a large and representative set of satirical headlines by pin-
pointing the essential, humor-carrying words in every head-
line: if the humor has been successfully removed from a
headline h by altering certain words, then we know that these
very words are key to making h funny.
This is especially true for single-substitution pairs; e.g.,
in the running example, God was replaced by Bob Dylan (a
particular human), giving rise to the serious-sounding Bob
Dylan diagnosed with bipolar disorder. The automatically
extracted chunk pair {God, Bob Dylan} surfaces both the
crucial commonality in the context of the headline (unpre-
dictability) and the crucial opposition (God vs. human; un-
predictability as a good vs. bad trait).
While the semantic analysis of original vs. substituted
chunks may be difﬁcult to automate, having access to ex-
plicit chunk pairs tremendously facilitates a large-scale hu-
man analysis. Conducting such an analysis revealed that the
above pattern of a crucial commonality combined with a cru-
cial opposition occurs in a large fraction of satirical head-
lines, and particularly in nearly all single-substitution pairs.
Script opposition. The crucial opposition has been called
script opposition by humor theorists (cf. Sec. 7), and we
henceforth adopt the same term. Inspecting all 254 sin-
gle-substitution pairs, we found each pair to be in at least
one of 6 oppositions, all representing “good”-vs.-“bad” di-
chotomies that are essential to the human condition, such as
high/low stature, life/death, or non-obscene/obscene. All 6
oppositions, alongside examples, are listed in Fig. 4(a).
We manually labeled all pairs with their (sometimes mul-
tiple) oppositions and observe that most pairs (68%) feature
an opposition of high/low stature (as in the running exam-
ple), and surprisingly few pairs (7%), one of non-obscene/
obscene. Due to its dominance, Fig. 4(a) further splits the
high/low stature opposition into 10 subtypes.
Main mechanism: false analogy. Moving to a more formal
analysis, we represent the running example schematically
in Fig. 4(b), while Fig. 4(c) abstracts away from the exam-
ple and depicts the generic template it implements, which
may be verbalized as follows. The pair involves two enti-
ties, x (God) and x′ (Bob Dylan), who share a crucial com-
mon property P (unpredictability), but whereas statement
P(x′) (“Bob Dylan is unpredictable”) could potentially entail
the serious headline H(x′) = h′ (Bob Dylan diagnosed with
bipolar disorder), the analogous statement P(x) (“God is un-
predictable”) cannot entail the analogous headline H(x) = h
(God diagnosed with bipolar disorder), for x and x′ are cru-

(a) Script oppositions in single-substitution pairs (H3 has two substitutions), with
percentage of pairs following each opposition. Examples show satirical headline
h = H(x) and a modiﬁed version h′ = H(x′) (cf. diagram (c)); format: {x, x′}.
Script opposition
Perc.
Example pair
high/low stature
68%
sublime/mundane
15%
H1. Bush picks {laser, rural} background for presidential portrait
success/failure
14%
H2. Iraqis {arming, preparing} selves for independence
authority/no authority
13%
H3. Fort Knox receives {$85, $85 million} from {Cash4Gold, Fed}
sophisticated/simple
10%
H4. City opens new art {jail, museum}
human/object
6%
H5. {Local bar, NFL star} comes out as gay
human/animal
5%
H6. Hollywood mourns passing of {16th or 17th Lassie, Robin Williams}
modern/outdated
5%
H7. General Motors reports record sales of new {disposable, eco} car
rich/poor
4%
H8. Asian economic woes force layoffs of 700,000 {pop stars, workers}
no religion/religion
3%
H9. {God, Bob Dylan} diagnosed with bipolar disorder (cf. diagram (b))
animal/object
1%
H10. New delicious {species, fruit} discovered
good/bad intentions
25%
H11. BP ready to resume oil {spilling, drilling}
reasonable/absurd response
17%
H12. Conservation group condemns {waterboarding, baths} as wasteful
no violence/violence
10%
H13. Russian ofﬁcials promise low {death, highway} toll for Olympics
life/death
9%
H14. Cancer victim given second chance at {death, life}
non-obscene/obscene
7%
H15. Tiger Woods announces return to {sex, golf}
(b) Example of false-analogy headline.
-
-
Bob Dylan is
unpredictable
God is
unpredictable
God diagnosed
with bipolar disorder
Bob Dylan diagnosed
with bipolar disorder

(c) Abstract false-analogy template.
-
-
P(x′)
P(x)
H(x) = h
H(x′) = h′

Figure 4: (a) Script oppositions and examples. (b) Example of false-analogy headline. (c) Abstract false-analogy template.
cially opposed via one of the script oppositions of Fig. 4(a)
(religion/no religion; or, God, for whom unpredictability is
a sign of perfection, vs. humans, for whom it is a sign of im-
perfection). Hence, we call this mechanism false analogy.
As the examples of Fig. 4(a) show, the analogy is never
marked lexically via words such as like; rather, it is evoked
implicitly, e.g., by blending the two realms of human psychi-
atry and biblical lore into a single headline. Only the satirical
headline H(x) itself (red box in Fig. 4(c)) is explicit to the
reader, whereas x′ and P (and thus all the other 3 boxes) need
to be inferred. A main advantage of our method is that it also
makes x′ explicit and thereby facilitates inferring P and thus
the semantic structure that induces humor (as in Fig. 4(b)).
We emphasize that the script opposition that invalidates
the logical step from P(x) to H(x) is not arbitrary, but must
be along certain dimensions essential to human existence
and contrasting “good” vs. “bad” (Fig. 4(a)). Interestingly,
in typical jokes, the “good” side is explicit and the “bad”
side must be inferred, whereas in satirical headlines, either
the “good” or the “bad” side may be explicit. And indeed, as
shown by the examples of Fig. 4(a) (where the “good” side is
marked in bold), satirical headlines differ from typical jokes
in that they tend to make the “bad” side explicit.
Single vs. multiple edit operations. A large fraction of all
headlines from The Onion—and an overwhelming fraction
of those in single-substitution pairs—can be analyzed with
the false-analogy template (and we indeed encourage the
reader to apply it to the examples of Fig. 4(a)). Addition-
ally, many of the pairs with two substitutions also follow
this template. H3 in Fig. 4(a), which plays on the opposi-
tion of the Federal Reserve being a serious institution vs.
Cash4Gold being a dubious enterprise exploiting its cus-
tomers, exempliﬁes how, whenever multiple substitutions
are applied, they all need to follow the same opposition (e.g.,
Fed : Cash4Gold = $85 million : $85 = serious : dubious).
6
Related work
The most widely accepted theory of verbal humor is the
so-called General Theory of Verbal Humor by Attardo and
Raskin (1991), an extension of Raskin’s (1985) Semantic-
Script Theory of Humor, which we summarize when dis-
cussing our ﬁndings in its context in Sec. 7.
Much follow-up work has built on these theories; see the
excellent primer edited by Raskin (2008). Here, we focus on
contributions from computer science, where most work has
been on the detection of humor in various forms, e.g., irony
(Reyes, Rosso, and Veale 2013; Wallace, Choe, and Char-
niak 2015), sarcasm (Davidov, Tsur, and Rappoport 2010;
Gonz´alez-Ib´anez, Muresan, and Wacholder 2011), and satire
(Burfoot and Baldwin 2009; Goldwasser and Zhang 2016),
sometimes with the goal of deciding which of two texts is
funnier (Shahaf, Horvitz, and Mankoff 2015). These works
use documents or sentences as the smallest unit of analysis,
whereas we operate at a ﬁner granularity, analyzing the very
words causing the switch from serious to funny.
Another cluster of work has considered the generation of
humor, mostly via ﬁxed templates such as acronyms (Stock
and Strapparava 2006), puns (Binsted and Ritchie 1997;
Ritchie et al. 2007), two-liners (Labutov and Lipson 2012),
or cross-reference ambiguity (Tinholt and Nijholt 2007).
Finally, our work also relates to efforts of constructing
humor corpora (Filatova 2012; Khodak, Saunshi, and Vo-
drahalli 2018). Here, too, we increase the granularity by ac-
tively generating new data, rather than compiling humorous
texts that have already been produced. Crucially, ours is a
corpus of aligned pairs, rather than individual texts, which
enables entirely novel analyses that were infeasible before.
7
Discussion and future work
Summary of ﬁndings. Comparing satirical to similar-but-
serious-looking headlines within the pairs collected via Un-
fun.me reveals that the humor tends to reside in the ﬁ-
nal words of satirical headlines, and particularly in noun
phrases. In order to remove the humor, players overwhelm-
ingly replace one phrase with another; rarely do they delete
phrases, and nearly never introduce new phrases. Reversing
the direction of the editing process, this implies that the most
straightforward way of producing satire from a serious head-

line is to replace a trailing noun phrase with another noun
phrase.
One may, however, not just replace any noun phrase with
any other noun phrase; rather, the corresponding scripts need
to be opposed along one of a few dimensions essential to
the human condition and typically pitting “good” vs. “bad”.
Also, the two opposing scripts need to be connected via cer-
tain subtle mechanisms, and we pointed out false analogy
as one prominent mechanism. These ﬁndings echo the pre-
dictions made by the prevailing theory of humor. We now
summarize this theory and discuss our results in its context.
Relation to Semantic-Script Theory of Humor. As men-
tioned (Sec. 6), the most inﬂuential theory of verbal humor
has been Raskin’s (1985) Semantic-Script Theory of Humor,
which posits a twofold necessary condition for humorous
text: (1) the text must be compatible with two different se-
mantic scripts (simply put, a semantic script is a concept
together with its commonsense links to other concepts); and
(2) the two scripts must be opposed to each other along one
of a small number of dimensions.
The second criterion is key: the mere existence of two par-
allel compatible scripts is insufﬁcient for humor, since this
is also the case in plain, non-humorous ambiguity. Rather,
one of the two scripts must be possible, the other, impos-
sible; one, normal, the other, abnormal; or one, actual, the
other, non-actual. These oppositions are abstract, and Raskin
(1985, p. 127) gives several more concrete classes of op-
position, which closely mirror the dimensions we empiri-
cally ﬁnd in our aligned pairs (Fig. 4(a)). Our results thus
conﬁrm the theory empirically. But the advantages of our
methodology go beyond, by letting us quantify the preva-
lence of each opposition. In addition to the concrete opposi-
tions of Fig. 4(a), we also counted how pairs distribute over
the above 3 abstract oppositions, ﬁnding that most satirical
headlines are of type possible/impossible (64%), followed
by normal/abnormal (28%), and ﬁnally actual/non-actual
(8%).
In typical jokes, one of the two scripts (the so-called bona
ﬁde interpretation) seems more likely given the text, so it
is in the foreground of attention. But in the punchline it
becomes clear that the bona ﬁde interpretation cannot be
true, causing initial confusion in the audience, followed by
a search for a more appropriate interpretation, and ﬁnally
surprise or relief when the actually intended, non–bona ﬁde
script is discovered. To enable this process on the recipient
side, the theory posits that the two scripts be connected in
speciﬁc ways, via the so-called logical mechanism, which
resolves the tension between the two opposed scripts.
Attardo (2001, p. 27) gives a comprehensive list of 27
logical mechanisms. While our analysis (Sec. 5) revealed
that one mechanism—false analogy—dominates in satirical
headlines, several others also occur: e.g., in ﬁgure–ground
reversal, the real problem (the “ﬁgure”) is left implicit, while
an unimportant side effect (the “ground”) moves into the
focus of attention (e.g., H12 in Fig. 4(a): waterboarding,
like baths, does waste water, but the real problem is ethical,
not ecological). Another common mechanism—cratylism—
plays with the assumption prevalent in puns that phonetic
implies semantic similarity (e.g., H11 in Fig. 4(a)).
Satire is a form of art, and the examples just cited high-
light that it is often the creative combination of several
mechanisms that makes a headline truly funny. Beyond the
bare mechanism, the precise wording matters, too: e.g., ei-
ther 16th Lassie or 17th Lassie would sufﬁce to make H6 in
Fig. 4(a) funny, but the combination 16th or 17th Lassie is
wittier, as it implies not only that Lassie has been played by
many dogs, but also that people do not care about them, thus
reinforcing the human/animal opposition.
We conclude that, while satirical headlines—as opposed
to typical jokes—offer little space for complex narratives,
they still behave according to theories of humor. Our con-
tributions, however, go beyond validating these theories: the
aligned corpus lets us quantify the prevalence of syntactic
and semantic effects at play and reveals that the dominant
logical mechanism in satirical headlines is false analogy.
Satirical-headline generation. This points to a way of gen-
erating satirical headlines by implementing the false-anal-
ogy template of Fig. 4(c): pick an entity x (e.g., Pepsi) and a
central property P(x) of x (e.g., “Pepsi is a popular drink”);
then pick another entity x′ for which P(x′) also holds, but
which is opposed to x along one of the axes of Fig. 4(a)
(e.g., Bordeaux wine, which is in a high/low stature [sub-
lime/mundane] opposition to Pepsi); and ﬁnally generate a
headline H(x′) based on P(x′) (e.g., 2018 Bordeaux vintage
beneﬁts from outstanding grape harvest) which cannot be
seriously formulated for x instead x′, due to the opposition,
yielding the satirical H(x) (e.g., 2018 Pepsi vintage beneﬁts
from outstanding high-fructose corn harvest, where we anal-
ogously replaced grape with high-fructose corn, cf. Sec. 5).
The subtitle of the present paper was also generated this way.
Most humans are unaware of the logical templates un-
derlying satire, while machines have difﬁculties ﬁnding en-
tity pairs opposed in speciﬁc ways and formulating pithy
headline text. We hence see promise in a hybrid system for
coupling the respective strengths of humans and machines,
where the machine guides the human through the template
instantiation process while relying on the human for opera-
tions such as ﬁnding appropriate entities for substitution etc.
Human perception of satirical vs. serious news. Recall
that in task 2 (Sec. 2), players also rate unmodiﬁed satiri-
cal and serious headlines g with respect to how likely they
consider them to be serious. Table 1 shows that, although
players are generally good at distinguishing satire from real
news, they do make mistakes: 10% of serious headlines are
consistently misclassiﬁed as satirical (e.g., Schlitz returns,
drums up nostalgic drinkers), and 8% of satirical headlines,
as serious (e.g., Baltimore looking for safer city to host Su-
per Bowl parade). Studying these misunderstood headlines
can yield interesting insights into how readers process news,
especially in an age where “fake news” is becoming a ubiq-
uitous scourge. We leave this analysis for future work.
Beyond humor. The mechanism underlying Unfun.me de-
ﬁnes a general procedure for identifying the essential por-
tion of a text that causes the text to have a certain property.

In our case, this property is humor, but when asking players
instead to remove the rudeness, sexism, euphemism, hyper-
bole, etc., from a given piece of text, we obtain a scalable
way of collecting ﬁne-grained supervised examples for bet-
ter understanding these ways of speaking linguistically.
8
Conclusion
Humor is key to human cognition and holds questions and
promise for advancing artiﬁcial intelligence. We focus on
the humorous genre of satirical news headlines and present
Unfun.me, an online game for collecting pairs of satirical
and similar-but-serious-looking headlines, which precisely
reveal the humor-carrying words and the semantic structure
in satirical news headlines. We hope that future work will
build on these initial results, as well as on the dataset that
we publish with this paper (West and Horvitz 2019), in order
to make further progress on understanding satire and, more
generally, the role of humor in intelligence.
