Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) Methods in Optical Networks: A Comprehensive Survey
Javier Mataa, Ignacio de Miguela, Ram´on J. Dur´ana, Noem´ı Merayoa, Sandeep Kumar Singhb, Admela Jukanb, Mohit Chamaniac
aUniversidad de Valladolid, ETSI de Telecomunicaci´on, Campus Miguel Delibes, 47011 Valladolid, Spain
bTechnische Universit¨at Carolo-Wilhelmina zu Braunschweig, Germany
cADVA Optical Networking, Berlin, Germany
Abstract
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) is an extensive scientiﬁc discipline which enables computer systems to solve problems by emulating
complex biological processes such as learning, reasoning and self-correction. This paper presents a comprehensive review of the
application of AI techniques for improving performance of optical communication systems and networks. The use of AI-based
techniques is ﬁrst studied in applications related to optical transmission, ranging from the characterization and operation of network
components to performance monitoring, mitigation of nonlinearities, and quality of transmission estimation. Then, applications
related to optical network control and management are also reviewed, including topics like optical network planning and operation
in both transport and access networks. Finally, the paper also presents a summary of opportunities and challenges in optical
networking where AI is expected to play a key role in the near future.
Keywords: Artiﬁcial intelligence, machine learning, optical communications, optical networks, optimization, survey
1. Introduction
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) entities and systems have the abil-
ity to perform operations analogous to learning and decision
making by imitating biological processes, with special empha-
sis on human cognitive processes. AI applications such as vir-
tual personal-assistants, smart vehicles, purchase prediction,
speech recognition or smart home devices, are almost ubiqui-
tous, and similar AI-based techniques are already changing our
daily lives in ways that improve human productivity, safety or
health, affecting even the way we entertain or communicate.
For the most part, AI does not deliver completely au-
tonomous systems, but instead adds knowledge and reasoning
to existing applications, databases, and environments, to make
them friendlier, smarter, and more sensitive to changes in their
environments. Each small breakthrough on AI research enables
us to expand our skills to solve new classes and scales of prob-
lems, thereby driving research and innovation in almost every
scientiﬁc discipline.
As an example, the improvement of the performance of
telecommunication networks by the application of AI-based
techniques has become an area under extensive research over
the past decades, affecting areas of transmission, switching and
network management. Optical communication networks and
systems have not stayed on the sidelines, but have started to
adopt this discipline towards AI-based optical networking, from
photonic devices to control and management.
The aim of this paper is to review some of the currently con-
sidered approaches to increase the performance of optical net-
works by the use of AI mechanisms, providing a survey of the

current research within this area, as well as an overview of op-
portunities and challenges arising in this context.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion 2 provides an introduction to the ﬁeld of AI. Since that is
a very broad area, we review those AI subﬁelds –and their as-
sociated techniques– which have had or are expected to have,
in our opinion, a signiﬁcant role in optical networking. Then,
Sections 3 and 4 analyze the role of AI techniques in optical
communication systems and networks. We ﬁrst survey the use
of AI in optical transmission (Section 3), and then we focus on
networking issues (Section 4). Finally, in Section 5 we describe
further opportunities and challenges, and we conclude in Sec-
tion 6.
2. An Overview of AI and Related Techniques
AI focuses on the study of intelligent or rational agents, i.e.,
entities which perceive and act in an environment with the aim
of achieving their goals or maximizing a performance param-
eter.
Moreover, they can further improve their performance
through learning [1].
In this section, we brieﬂy go through some of the subﬁelds
of AI that have been successfully employed in optical network-
ing, stating the motivation for their introduction, and providing
some examples of their use in the optical networking literature.
Figure 1 shows a diagram with AI subﬁelds and techniques, and
classiﬁes the references reviewed in this survey within those
categories.
The simplest type of networking scenarios that we can think
of are deterministic, observable, static and completely known.
For these scenarios, search algorithms and optimization theory
are key elements of the AI area [1], and thus, they have been ex-
tensively used in optical network design and control for a long
Preprint submitted to Optical Switching and Networking
January 16, 2018
arXiv:1801.01704v2  [cs.AI]  15 Jan 2018

Figure 1: AI subﬁelds and techniques applied to optical networks
time. Examples include the use of breadth-ﬁrst-search algo-
rithms for routing, and linear and mixed-integer linear program-
ming formulations for network planning (e.g., [2, 3]). However,
when some of the conditions previously mentioned are relaxed,
or when the network size prohibits the use of the former tech-
niques, those methods have been complemented or replaced by
local search algorithms and metaheuristics like simulated an-
nealing, genetic algorithms, swarm optimization, and teaching-
learning based optimization [4, 5]. For instance, optical net-
work planning [6, 7] and lightpath establishment [8, 9] have
beneﬁted from those techniques.
In many cases, the optical network has a single point of in-
telligence (like a centralized control node), i.e., a single agent.
However, in other cases, different intelligent agents are in-
volved, so that the actions taken by an agent have an im-
pact on the others.
For those scenarios, game theory may
come into play, and proposals in the area of optical network-
ing can be found, e.g., in [10] (in the context of hybrid radio-
frequency/free space optics networks), [11] (in the context of
elastic optical networks, EONs), or [12] (a book completely de-
voted to the topic).
A stride forward towards making agents more intelligent
comes by incorporating the use of knowledge, reasoning and
planning.
In this case, intelligent agents keep a knowledge
base (KB) where relevant knowledge about the environment
and about the impact of their actions is stored. That KB is used
by the agents when devising plans of action on how to succeed
on decision-making, and can be updated in order to adapt to
changing conditions. Along this line, holistic frameworks, like
cognitive optical networks, which perceive, act, learn, adapt and
optimize their performance, have been proposed by different re-
searchers [13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18].
Three noteworthy topics when it comes to incorporating in-
telligence to optical systems or networks are how to handle un-
certainty, how to tackle decision-making, and how to learn.
For sure, in an optical network there are non-deterministic
events taking place, and lack of full information about the envi-
ronment is not a rare issue. Therefore, intelligent agents must
be able to operate under uncertainty in a robust way. The laws
of probability and, in particular, Bayesian networks are useful
tools to build those robust models (e.g. [19]). Moreover, optical
systems and networks are subject to constant changes. Hence,
intelligent agents must include inference algorithms for tempo-
ral models to perform tasks like ﬁltering, prediction or smooth-
ing, relying on techniques like hidden Markov models (HMM)
[20] and Kalman ﬁlters [21, 22].
A second key element is the use of decision-making algo-
rithms. The underlying principle for these algorithms is the
maximization of the expected utility, in which a utility func-
tion is deﬁned in order to assign a single number to express the
desirability of a state and an agent makes decisions with the aim
of maximizing such a function (e.g. [23]). Realistic network-
ing environments, however, must deal with uncertainty and the
utility of an agent usually depends on a sequence of decisions
rather than on a single isolated one. Decision making in optical
network agents can therefore be modelled as sequential deci-
sion problems in uncertain environments. These problems can
be solved by Markov decision processes (MDPs) if the agent’s
2

actions depend only on the current state of the agent, and not
on its history. MDPs are deﬁned by a transition model, which
speciﬁes the probabilistic outcomes of actions, and by a reward
function, which speciﬁes the reward in each state. The solu-
tion of an MDP is a policy that associates a decision with every
state that the agent might reach. An optimal policy maximizes
the utility of the state sequences encountered when it is exe-
cuted. The use of MDPs in optical networking has been shown
in [24, 25, 26, 127].
The third issue of paramount importance is learning. Learn-
ing enables an agent to improve its performance on future tasks
due to acquired experience. The inclusion of learning is impor-
tant for several reasons. A learning-capable agent can adapt to
changes in the environment and it is even able to adapt to un-
foreseen scenarios that could not be anticipated when the agent
was designed. Moreover, in many cases, learning from existing
data may be the only way to generate a working model, or in
other words, as stated in [1], sometimes human programmers
(or engineers) have no idea on how to program a solution them-
selves. Statistical learning and machine learning provide the
theory and tools to learn from existing data, which can be gath-
ered in optical communications systems and networks thanks to
monitoring techniques.
Although agents can handle uncertainty by using the meth-
ods of probability and decision theory, they must learn their
probabilistic theories from experience. Thus, bayesian learning
methods [27] formulate learning as a form of probabilistic infer-
ence, using the observations to update a prior distribution over
hypotheses; maximum a posteriori (MAP) learning [28] selects
a single most likely hypothesis given the data, and maximum-
likelihood learning [29] simply selects the hypothesis that max-
imizes the likelihood of the data. These techniques have been
used in optical receivers, e.g., in [30, 31, 32].
Apart from the above mentioned techniques machine learn-
ing has also been widely used. There are three main categories
in machine learning. In supervised learning [1] an agent ob-
serves some example input-output pairs and learns a function
that maps from input to output. Techniques include linear re-
gression, logistic regression, decision trees, artiﬁcial neural net-
works, nearest neighbor models and support vector machines
(SVM) to name just a few. Moreover, different models can
be combined in ensemble learning, with the aim of improv-
ing results. Supervised learning has been used, for instance,
for optical performance monitoring [33], to estimate the quality
of transmission (QoT) in optical networks [34, 35, 36, 37, 38]
and for resource allocation in data centers [39]. In unsuper-
vised learning [1], an agent learns patterns from the input even
though no explicit output is supplied. For instance, cluster-
ing and principal component analysis methods, which belong
to this type of learning, have been used for optical perfor-
mance monitoring, modulation format recognition and impair-
ment mitigation [40, 41, 42]. Finally, in reinforcement learning
[43] an agent learns an optimal (or nearly optimal) policy from
a series of reinforcements (rewards) or punishments received
from its interaction with the environment. Some techniques in-
clude adaptive dynamic programming and temporal-difference
(TD) methods. Q-learning, a well-known technique of the latter
type, aims to ﬁnd an optimal quality value (Q-Value) of action-
selection policy for any given (ﬁnite) Markov decision process
[44]. For instance, Q-learning has been used for path and wave-
length selection in the context of optical burst-switched (OBS)
networks [45].
3. Applications of AI in Optical Transmission
In this section, we describe applications of AI techniques
in the physical layer of optical networks, i.e., in optical
transmission-related issues. AI techniques can help improve the
conﬁguration and operation of network devices, optical perfor-
mance monitoring, modulation format recognition, ﬁber non-
linearities mitigation and quality of transmission (QoT) estima-
tion. These applications are summarized in Table 1.
3.1. Characterization and Operation of Transmitters
AI techniques facilitate statistical modeling of individual op-
tical components by including the underlying physics. In all
these cases where a deterministic approach results in an imprac-
tical computational load, learning mechanisms are becoming a
promising and accurate performance improvement tool.
With the advent of advanced modulation formats aiming to
increase the spectral efﬁciency, ranging from 16 quadrature am-
plitude modulation (16 QAM) to 64 QAM and beyond, the
need for robust carrier frequency and phase synchronization
becomes crucial. At this point, a precise characterization of
amplitude and phase noise of lasers is essential. Conventional
time-domain approaches perform coherent detection in combi-
nation with digital signal processing (DSP) to cope with this is-
sue [60, 61], but as higher order modulation formats are imple-
mented, the accuracy of the phase noise estimation is compro-
mised in the presence of moderate measurement noise. Zibar et
al. [46] present a framework of Bayesian ﬁltering in combina-
tion with expectation maximization (EM) to accurately charac-
terize laser amplitude and phase noise that outperforms conven-
tional approaches. Results demonstrate an accurate estimation
of the phase noise even in the presence of large measurement
noise.
Additional examples of the use of AI techniques in the opti-
mization of transmitters and lasers include the work by Hragui
et al. [47], who use simulated annealing to determine the opti-
mal settings in terms of ﬂatness for optical comb sources for
ultradense WDM passive optical networks, and the work by
Brunton et al. [48], who jointly use machine learning, genetic
algorithms and adaptive control techniques to provide a self-
tuning mechanism for mode-locked ﬁber lasers.
3.2. Operation of Erbium-Doped Fiber Ampliﬁers (EDFAs)
EDFAs are another optical network component on which AI
techniques have been extensively applied. EDFAs are one of the
key elements of optical transport networks, capable of extend-
ing the reach of the transmitted optical signal by performing
ampliﬁcation of WDM channels in the optical domain. Ma-
chine learning techniques offer efﬁcient solutions to a wide
3

Table 1: Applications in optical transmission taking advantage of AI techniques
Applications
AI techniques
Literature
Transmitters
Bayesian ﬁltering and
expectation-maximization
[46]: characterizes laser amplitude and phase noise.
Simulated annealing
[47]: determines the optimal settings for optical comb sources for ultradense WDM passive optical networks.
Machine learning (pattern
learning methods) and genetic
algorithms
[48]: self-tuning mechanism for mode-locked ﬁber lasers.
Optical ampliﬁcation control
Kernelized linear regression
Linear/logistic regression
Multilayer perceptron neural network
[49]: deﬁnes regression model to study power excursions in multi-span EDFA networks.
[50]: uses a ridge regression model to cope with the discrepancy among post-EDFA channel powers.
[51]: autonomous adjustment of the operating point of ampliﬁers in an EDFA cascade.
Linear impairments identiﬁcation
Kalman ﬁlter
Neural networks
Principal component analysis
[21]: carrier phase tracking, polarization tracking, and estimation of the ﬁrst-order PMD.
[33]: identiﬁes CD, PMD and OSNR provided that bit-rate and modulation format is known.
[41]: monitors CD, PMD and OSNR.
OSNR monitoring
Deep neural networks (DNN)
Neural networks
[52]: uses DNN, trained with asynchronously sampled raw data, for OSNR monitoring.
[53]: uses neural networks based nonlinear regression for OSNR estimation.
Modulation format recognition
Principal component analysis
Support vector machines (SVM)
Clustering k- means
[41]: identiﬁes modulation formats/bit rates from a known set.
[53]: classiﬁes modulation formats using the variance of eye opening width.
[40]: identiﬁes modulation formats based on the number of levels and clusters in constellation diagram.
Receivers, nonlinearity mitigation
Maximum a posteriori
[30]: looks for phase estimates feasible to calculate in real-time.
Maximum-likelihood
[31]: proposes various equalization schemes for high capacity WDM interconnects.
[54]: Maximum-likelihood detection for phase-modulated systems with linear and nonlinear phase noise.
Maximum-likelihood and
maximum a posteriori
[32]: proposes various estimators to recover the phase in Offset-QAM-based ﬁlterbank multicarrier systems.
Bayesian ﬁltering and
expectation-maximization
[55]: proposes state-space models for cross-polarization mitigation, carrier synchronization, symbol
detection.
Nonlinear support vector
machines
[56]: SVM is applied to create decision boundaries to avoid errors induced by nonlinear impairment.
K-nearest neighbors
[57]: proposes an algorithm that learns the link properties and generates the nonlinear decision boundaries for
maximizing transmission distance and improving nolinear tolerance.
Clustering k-means
[42]: proposes a technique to mitigate the effect of time-varying impairments, e.g., phase noise.
Nonlinear support vector
machines and Newton method
[58]: uses Newton-method (N-SVM) to reduce inter-subcarrier nonlinear crosstalk effects.
QoT estimation
Case-Based Reasoning (CBR)
[34]: presents a QoT estimator to decide whether a lightpath fulﬁls QoT requirements or not.
CBR + learning/forgetting
[35]: optimizes previous CBR approach for QoT estimation with learning and forgetting techniques.
CBR + learning/forgetting
[36]: experimental demonstration of the QoT estimator [35] in a WDM 80 Gb/s PDM-QPSK testbed.
Random forests classiﬁer
[37]: predicts the probability that the BER of a candidate lightpath will not exceed a given threshold.
Linear regression
[38]: uses BER information monitoring and a learning process (based on linear regression)
in order to estimate the BER of each new service request.
Support vector machines
[59]: proposes a fast and accurate lightpath QoT estimator based on SVM to decide whether a lightpath fulﬁls
QoT requrements or not.
range of challenges inherent to the operation of EDFAs within
optical ﬁber transmission.
Speciﬁcally, Huang et al. [49] deﬁne a regression problem
with supervised machine learning (using a radial basis function)
to statistically model the channel dependence of power excur-
sions in multi-span EDFA networks, learning from historical
data. It provides the system with accurate recommendations
on channel add/drop strategies to minimize the power dispar-
ity among channels. With the arrival of ﬂex-grid networks, in
which dynamic defragmentation is often applied to reoptimize
spectrum assignment to active connections in order to improve
the spectral efﬁciency, the previous study is extended in [50] to
cope with the power excursion problem in dynamically chang-
ing spectral conﬁgurations. A ridge regression model is used to
determine the magnitude of the impact of a given sub-channel,
and a logistic regression is applied to specify whether the con-
tribution will result in an increase or decrease in the discrepancy
among post-EDFA powers. Additionally, a novel method for
autonomous adjustment of the operating point of ampliﬁers in
an EDFA cascade by using a multilayer perceptron neural net-
work is presented in [51]. The aim of this adjustment is to opti-
mize the performance of the link by minimizing both the noise
ﬁgure and the ripple of the frequency response of the transmis-
sion system while ensuring predeﬁned input and output power
levels.
3.3. Performance Monitoring
A challenge in network control and management is to adapt
to the time-varying link performance parameters, such as opti-
cal signal to noise ratio (OSNR), nonlinearity factors, chromatic
dispersion (CD) and polarization mode dispersion (PMD). This
subsection analyzes the suitability of the application of AI tech-
niques in monitoring some of the aforementioned factors.
The estimation and acquisition of physical parameters of
transmitted optical signals allow network-diagnosis in or-
der to take actions (repairing damages, driving compen-
sators/equalizers or rerouting trafﬁc around non-optimal links)
against malfunctions [62].
As an example, Wu et al. [33]
present an extensive study of the application of artiﬁcial neu-
ral networks in optical performance monitoring (OPM), which
includes the simultaneous identiﬁcation of accumulated non-
linearity, OSNR, CD and PMD, from eye-diagram and eye-
histogram parameters, while Szafraniec et al. [21] propose
Kalman ﬁlter as an estimator for carrier phase tracking, polar-
ization tracking, and estimation of the ﬁrst-order PMD. How-
ever, techniques applied in [33] and similar ones [63, 64] re-
4

quire prior knowledge about the type of signal (bit-rate and
modulation format), or additional cross-layer communication
is required at the intermediate nodes to acquire this information
from the upper-layer protocols, which would result in a sig-
niﬁcant increase in node complexity. In this context, a novel
technique for simultaneous linear impairments identiﬁcation
(OSNR, CD and PMD) that is independent from bitrate and
modulation format, provided that this information belongs to
a known set, is proposed in [41]. The study is performed us-
ing principal component analysis-based pattern recognition on
asynchronous delay-tap plots and it yields accurate results in
the simultaneous monitoring of linear impairments.
Another recent work facing the limited scalability of the
studies previously mentioned, which are based on the prior
knowledge of a determined set of signals is presented in [52],
where a deep neural network (DNN), trained with raw data
asynchronously sampled by a coherent receiver is proposed for
OSNR monitoring. Results show that OSNR is accurately esti-
mated. Yet, this DNN needs to be conﬁgured with at least 5 lay-
ers and needs to be trained with 400,000 samples to achieve ac-
curate results, requiring long training time. Alternately, Thrane
et al. [53] propose an OSNR estimator and a modulation format
classiﬁer for systems employing advanced modulation formats
(up to 64 QAM) and direct detection. The OSNR estimator em-
ploys a neural network, while the modulation format classiﬁer
uses a support vector machine (SVM), both in order to learn a
continuous mapping function between input features extracted
from the power eye-diagram after the photodetector and the ref-
erence OSNR and modulation format, respectively. Although
accurate results are obtained for OSNR estimation and modula-
tion format classiﬁcation, the study only considers white Gaus-
sian noise, while ignoring for the moment linear and nonlinear
optical ﬁber impairments.
3.4. Receivers and Mitigation of Nonlinearities
Currently, the information capacity of ﬁber optic systems is
limited by nonlinear effects of the optical ﬁber. Extensive re-
search effort has attempted to address mitigation of nonlineari-
ties on the transmission over optical ﬁber. Among these nonlin-
earities, nonlinear phase noise (NLPN) is one of the prominent
factors. So far this issue has been treated with electronic meth-
ods relying on the deterministic information of the ﬁxed ﬁber
link, like maximum likelihood estimation [54], digital back
propagation [65] and stochastic digital back propagation [66],
which may be computationally too heavy for practical imple-
mentation.
Currently, machine learning techniques are being incorpo-
rated to digital signal processing to mitigate nonlinearities in a
more efﬁcient way, allowing more accurate symbol detection.
As an example, a cognitive digital receiver is proposed in [40],
which, by means of clustering algorithms, is able to identify
the incoming signal format, QPSK/8PSK/16QAM, without the
need to receive a prior control message, thus opening the door to
the autonomous modiﬁcation of the modulation format. In ad-
dition, state-space models in combination with Bayesian ﬁlter-
ing and expectation maximization are presented in [55] with the
aim of taking into account the underlying physics of the chan-
nel and optical elements in the formulation of signal process-
ing algorithms. As a result, an overall system improvement is
achieved, including cross-polarization mitigation, carrier syn-
chronization and optimal symbol detection. However, expec-
tation maximization depends on the parameters of the trans-
mission link and consequently it is not applicable to dynamic
optical networks.
Furthermore, Wang et al. [56] propose a machine learning al-
gorithm to mitigate NLPN affecting M-ary phase-shift keying
(M-PSK) based coherent optical transmission systems. Specif-
ically, the algorithm introduced is a nonlinear SVM classiﬁer
able to generate nonlinear decision boundaries that allows to
bypass the errors induced by nonlinear impairments in the con-
stellations of M-PSK signals, resulting in improvements both in
the maximum transmission distance and launch power dynamic
range. Notwithstanding, SVM is basically a binary classiﬁer,
so to deal with higher order modulation formats, many SVMs
would be necessary.
Drawbacks derived from both previously mentioned studies
are solved in [57], where a k-nearest neighbors-based detec-
tor is described and demonstrated. This algorithm only needs
a small set of labeled data in order to learn the link properties
and generate the nonlinear decision boundaries. Moreover, it
performs a multi-class classiﬁcation and, therefore, it is capa-
ble of classifying multiple kinds of data simultaneously. In this
way, maximum transmission distance and nonlinear tolerance
improvements are demonstrated in a 16 QAM coherent trans-
mission system. Following the same line of study, Torres et al.
[42] propose a non-symmetric demodulation technique for re-
ceivers equipped with DSP based on clustering (using k-means
algorithm), which mitigates the effect of time-varying impair-
ments such as imbalance of in-phase and quadrature signals (IQ
imbalance), bias drift and phase noise. This machine learning-
based demodulator is computationally highly efﬁcient and also
transparent with respect to the nonlinearity source. Finally, a
recent study [58] extends previous approaches by introducing
these techniques in more advanced systems, with greater spec-
tral efﬁciency, such as coherent optical orthogonal frequency
division multiplexing (CO-OFDM) systems. The proposed al-
gorithm is a nonlinear equalizer SVM of reduced classiﬁer
complexity using the Newton-method (N-SVM). It achieves an
effective handling of inter-subcarrier nonlinear crosstalk effects
and an increase of the launched optical power with low compu-
tational load.
3.5. Quality of Transmission (QoT) Estimation
Optical connection (or lightpath) QoT estimation prior to de-
ployment is particularly relevant in impairment-aware optical
network design and operation. Azodolmolky et al. [67] pre-
sented a QoT estimator tool, the Q-Tool, which computes the
associated Q-factors of a set of lightpaths, given a reference
topology, by combining analytical models and numerical meth-
ods. These estimates are relatively accurate, but the necessary
high computing time to perform the calculations makes this tool
impractical in scenarios where time constraints are important.
Several approaches propose cognitive techniques to solve this
5

drawback. As an example, Jim´enez et al. [34] present a QoT
estimator capable of exploiting previous experience and thus,
provide with fast and correct decisions on whether a lightpath
fulﬁls QoT requirements or not. It is based on case-based rea-
soning (CBR) [68], an artiﬁcial intelligence mechanism that of-
fers solutions to new problems by retrieving the most similar
cases faced in the past whether by reusing them or after adapt-
ing them. Cases are retrieved from a knowledge base (KB),
which can be static [34] or optimized with learning and for-
getting techniques [35]. Results for CBR relying on an opti-
mized KB show an excellent rate of successful classiﬁcation of
lightpaths into high/low QoT categories and more important, up
to four orders of magnitude faster than the Q-Tool mentioned
above. Furthermore, this study is experimentally demonstrated
in a WDM 80 Gb/s PDM-QPSK testbed [36], where, even with
a very small KB, very high rates of successful classiﬁcations
of lightpaths are achieved. One step further, and with the aim
of further reducing the prediction time, Mata et al. [59] pro-
pose the use of an SVM classiﬁer to predict if a lightpath fulﬁls
QoT requirements or not. This classiﬁer proves to be not only
signiﬁcantly faster but also more accurate than the proposal in
[35].
Another proposal for QoT estimation is that of Barletta et
al. [37], who apply a machine learning-based classiﬁer, specif-
ically a random forest, to predict the probability that the BER
of a candidate lightpath will not exceed a given threshold. Fi-
nally, Oda et al. [38] present the concept of “living network”,
an optical network which keeps records of its path-level perfor-
mance, which takes advantage of BER information monitoring
and of a learning process (based on linear regression) in order
to estimate the BER of each new service request.
4. Applications of AI in Optical Networking
AI presents several opportunities for automating operations
and introducing intelligent decision making in network plan-
ning and in dynamic control and management of network re-
sources, including issues like connection establishment, self-
conﬁguration and self-optimization, through prediction and es-
timation by utilizing present network state and historical data.
In this section, we review these applications as well as use cases
of AI in optical burst-switched networks (OBS), in passive op-
tical networks (PONs) and intra-datacenter networks. These
applications are summarized in Tables 2 and 3.
4.1. Optical Network Planning
As described in Section 2, search algorithms and optimiza-
tion theory have been widely used for optical network plan-
ning and dimensioning (e.g., [2, 3]), usually complemented
or extended with local search algorithms and metaheuristics
like simulated annealing, swarm optimization and genetic al-
gorithms [5].
Optical network planning involves tasks like designing the
physical topology of the network and ensuring survivability
while minimizing costs. Morais et al. [69] propose the use of
genetic algorithms (GAs) to address those issues in an opaque
optical transport network, and de Miguel et al. [72] also rely
on a GA for dimensioning dynamic WDM ring networks. A
related optimization problem, like minimizing the number of
all-optical regenerators, is tackled by Martinelli et al. [6] with
a GA, which also jointly solves the routing and wavelength as-
signment (RWA) problem while ensuring the QoT for the light-
paths to be established. The problem of placing regenerators in
optical networks subject to fault tolerance constraints has also
been approached by means of ant colony optimization (ACO)
techniques [7]. This proposal guarantees survivability of the
underlying network whilst also minimizing the number of re-
generators required. High quality solutions are provided, with
reasonable runtimes. Furthermore, a GA aiming to jointly op-
timize the selection of nodes performing 3R regeneration, code
rate, and routing and spectrum allocation for lightpaths to be
established in ﬂex-grid code-rate adaptive optical networks is
proposed in [70]. The addition of the code rate in the classi-
cal resource and allocation problem entails establishing a trade-
off between minimizing the number of regeneration nodes and
minimizing the need of spectral resources. Results indicate that,
in general, with just few nodes selected for regeneration, it is
possible to ensure QoT and exploit the advantages of code-rate
adaptiveness. In the context of ﬂex-grid network planning, it is
worthy to note the work by Velasco et al. [71]. They propose
a novel network architecture consisting of a set of IP/MPLS
areas performing routing and ﬂow aggregation, which are inter-
connected through a ﬂex-grid optical core. In order to obtain
near-optimal solutions for this architecture for real-sized net-
work and trafﬁc instances, they employ GAs (in particular, bi-
ased random-key GAs). Under these circumstances, simulation
results reveal that extending the core toward the edges results in
signiﬁcant savings in both the core and IP/MPLS networks.
A different approach, [73], presents a particle swarm opti-
mization (PSO) algorithm in order to solve the problem of re-
source allocation based on the signal-to-noise plus interference
ratio optimization in a hybrid wavelength division multiplex-
ing/optical code division multiplexing network (WDM/OCDM)
under Quality of Service (QoS) restrictions and the energy ef-
ﬁciency constraint problem. The PSO strategy allows the reg-
ulation of the transmitted power in order to maximize the en-
ergy efﬁciency.
Results show interesting trade-offs between
performance and complexity. Following the same trend, [74]
presents an alternative algorithm, a heuristic ACO scheme, for
allocation of transmitted power with increasing energy efﬁ-
ciency applicable to optical WDM/OCDM transport networks.
In addition, an analytical disciplined convex optimization ap-
proach, taking into account the performance and complex-
ity metrics, is proposed as comparison.
Simulation results
demonstrate that the ACO scheme proves to be useful in or-
der to obtain spectral-efﬁcient and energy efﬁcient systems
suitable for WDM/OCDM networks, with promising perfor-
mance–complexity trade-offs in comparison with the analytical
approach.
Another example of the use of AI in resource allocation is
the work by Petridou et al. [75].
They propose a message
scheduling algorithm, based on the k-means clustering algo-
rithm, which addresses both message sequencing and channel
6

Table 2: Applications in optical networking taking advantage of AI techniques (I)
Applications
AI techniques
Literature
Survivable optical networks
Genetic algorithms
[69]:
designs the physical topology of the network ensuring survivability.
Ant colony optimization
[7]:
guarantees survivability of the underlying network whilst minimizing the number of regenerators.
Regenerator placement
Genetic algorithms
[6]:
minimizes the number of all-optical regenerators in order to minimize network cost.
[70]:
optimizes the selection of regenerators, code rate, and routing and spectrum allocation in ﬂex-grid
code-rate adaptive optical networks.
Ant colony optimization
[7]:
guarantees survivability of the underlying network whilst minimizing the number of regenerators.
Resource allocation
Genetic algorithms
[71]:
proposes a novel network architecture interconnecting a set of IP/MPLS areas, performing routing
and ﬂow aggregation, through a ﬂex-grid optical core.
[72]:
proposes a method for joint routing and dimensioning of dynamic WDM ring networks.
Particle swarm optimization
[73]:
solves the problem of resource allocation under Quality of Service (QoS) restrictions and the energy
efﬁciency constraint problem.
Ant colony optimization
[74]:
allocation of transmitted power for energy efﬁcient optical WDM/OCDM networks.
K-means clustering
[75]:
proposes a message scheduling algorithm that addresses both the message sequencing and channel
assignment issues for a WDM star network.
Markov decision processes
[26]:
models the resource allocation problem as a MDP to optimize an objective arbitrarily
deﬁned by the network operator.
Connection establishment
Swarm intelligence
[76]:
proposes multiobjective algorithms based on swarm intelligence to solve the RWA problem.
Genetic algorithms
[6]:
solves the RWA problem while also ensuring QoT of lightpaths to be established.
[8]:
solves the Impairment Aware static RWA problem.
[77]:
solves the RMLSA problem.
[78]:
considers multicast ﬂows for RSA using different selection and crossover strategies.
[79]:
solves the RSA problem in ﬂex-grid networking producing useful insights into network design.
[80]:
solves the RSA problem with joint anycast and unicast demands.
Ant colony optimization
[9]:
RWA solution with great robustness and adaptability to varying network and trafﬁc conditions.
[81]:
reduces network’s energy footprint by ﬁnding the most energy-efﬁcient routes.
[82]:
introduces a heuristic on the way ants choose a request from demand space in order to ﬁnd the
shortest path.
Case-based reasoning
[83]:
reduces computing complexity when solving the traditional RWA problem in dynamic WRONs.
Simulated annealing
[84]:
solves the RMLSA problem in elastic networks.
[85]:
solves the RMCSA problem in elastic networks with space division multiplexing (SDM).
[124]: solves the RSA problem with joint anycast and unicast demands.
Tabu search
[86], [87]: solve RSA problem providing also dedicated path protection.
Backpropagation neural
network
[88]:
predicts the arrival time and holding time of future connections by considering past experiences.
[128]: proposes neural network-based trafﬁc prediction to eliminate unnecessary lightpath
termination and re-establishment operations.
Q-learning
[45]:
solves path and wavelength selection in OBS networks.
Game theory
[11]:
solves RSA problem by properly balancing the spectrum utilization and security-level of the
domain in multidomain EONs.
Neural networks and
[89]:
estimates the connection blocking probability.
principal component analysis
Kalman ﬁlters
[22]:
reduces blocking ratio by estimating the wavelength occupancy prior to the RWA decision.
Markov decision processes
[24]:
derives the optimal lightpath establishment policy for each service class by means of a MDP.
[25]:
proposes the use of an efﬁcient dynamic-preemption call admission control scheme
based on the optimal policy derived from a MDP.
Network reconﬁguration
Genetic algorithms and
ant colony optimization
[90]:
survivable mapping of a given WDM virtual topology.
Genetic algorithms
[91]:
designs virtual topologies while reducing energy consumption and network congestion.
[92]:
techno-economic study of the introduction of cognitive techniques in virtual topology design.
[93]:
addresses reliable multicast Virtual Network mapping for OFDM based EONs.
Genetic algorithms and
cognition
[94]:
produces estimations that can help to anticipate changes in the trafﬁc and proactively reconﬁgure
the virtual network topology.
Neural networks
[95]:
performs reconﬁgurations based on the trafﬁc volume and direction predicted by a neural network.
Markov decision processes
[127]: determines how frequently to reconﬁgure a broadcast WDM optical network based on MDPs.
Failure/fault detection
Bayesian networks, clustering
[96]:
identiﬁes or locates failures in the virtual network topology to improve quality of service.
Cognition-based methods
[97]:
detects failures in centralized SDN-based networks by periodically exchanging the messages
between controller and switches.
Bayesian inference/networks
[19], [98]: probabilistic modeling and machine learning for fault diagnosis in optical access networks
Software Deﬁned Networking
Cognition-based methods
[99]:
correct mapping of topologies in considerably low total times.
[100]: introduces a transport SDN controller that facilitates optical network virtualization and
autonomic operation.
[101]: proposes a new inter-networking paradigm based on broker agents with cognitive intelligence.
Neural networks
[102]: maximizes link capacity after predicting link performance in correlation with the OSNR.
Reduction/estimation of burst loss
Learning automata
[103]: achieves self-awareness, self-protection and self-optimization in OBS networks.
Q-learning
[45]:
solves path and wavelength selection in OBS networks.
[104]: exploits the feedback loop to control the retransmission rate of bursts that are lost.
[105]: introduces a low-complexity solution to resolve contention in OBS networks
Hidden Markov model
and expectation-maximization
[23]:
proposes variations of the TCP protocols to enhance the performance of OBS networks.
Bayesian networks
[106]: decreases the burst loss ratio (BLR) in a OBS network.
Feed-forward neural network
and Q-learning
[107]: proposes deﬂection routing protocols that achieve smaller burst-loss probabilities
than previous approaches while deﬂecting bursts less frequently.
Extreme learning machine
[108]: estimates burst loss probability.
Ant colony optimization
[109]: proposes an ACO approach to reduce burst loss ratio, enhancing at the same time the delay.
7

Table 3: Continuation: Applications in optical networking taking advantage of AI techniques (II)
Applications
AI techniques
Literature
Statistical solutions for prediction
Hidden Markov model (HMM)
[20]:
uses HMM based trafﬁc prediction along with QoS aware light path establishment in WDM
networks.
Bayesian methods and game theory
[10]:
utilizes a Bayesian game-theoretic model to guarantee cooperativeness in RF/FSO networks.
Intelligent ROADM
Linear regression
[38]:
autonomously keeps record of path-level performance.
Splitter placement in PONs
Genetic algorithms
[110], [111], [112]: these papers optimize the location of splitter to achieve various objectives in PON.
QoS guarantees and dynamic
bandwidth allocation in PONs
Genetic algorithms and
neural networks
[113], [114], [115],[116], [117]: use genetic algorithms or neural networks to assure QoS in PON
Bayesian estimation
[118]: proposes estimation and prediction-based Just-In-Time dynamic bandwidth allocation algorithm.
Placement of ONUs
Teaching learning-based optimization
[119]: reduces the required Optical Network Units (ONUs) that assure connectivity among
wireless routers and ONUs in a Fiber-Wireless network.
Genetic algorithms
[120]: another non-deterministic approach for placement of ONUs.
Cognitive optical networks
Cognition-based methods
[13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18]: these papers propose cognitive optical network architectures.
Intra-Datacenters
Multilayer perceptron
[39]:
allocates resources (optical circuits/electrical switches) to ﬂows according to their requirements.
Neural networks
[121]: presents a ﬂow classiﬁer at the edge of the network combined with an SDN centralized controller.
Markov decision processes
[122]: makes scheduling decisions in all-optical data center networks guaranteeing throughput optimality
under a zero reconﬁguration delay.
assignment for a WDM star network. Based on the produced
clusters, the scheduling algorithm manages to avoid scheduling
consecutive messages to the same destination which harms the
channels’ utilization.
4.2. Connection Establishment
Metaheuristics like simulated annealing and evolutionary
methods like genetic algorithms or particle swarm optimiza-
tion, are effective in solving hard optimization problems be-
cause they are less likely to become trapped in local optima.
Therefore, these methods are useful to solve the optical con-
nection (lightpath) establishment problem in optical networks.
In WDM networks, this involves searching a combination of
route and available wavelength, and is so called the routing and
wavelength assignment (RWA) problem. In elastic optical net-
works (EONs), it involves searching for a route and a portion
of available spectrum and even a modulation format, i.e., solv-
ing the routing and spectrum allocation (RSA) or the routing,
modulation level and spectrum allocation (RMLSA) problems.
A multi-objective GA for solving the impairment-aware
static RWA problem is presented in [8], and Rubio-Largo et
al. [76] present a comparative study among three multiobjective
evolutionary algorithms (MOEAs) based on swarm intelligence
to solve the RWA problem in real-world optical networks: arti-
ﬁcial bee colony algorithm, gravitational search algorithm and
ﬁreﬂy algorithm, concluding that swarm intelligence is very
suitable for this task.
Wang et al. [9] include considerations of mixed line rate,
physical impairments and trafﬁc grooming functionality to
solve the RWA problem by means of an ACO algorithm. Differ-
ent conﬁgurations of this distributed solution are compared to
each other and also with a centralized grooming adaptive short-
est path algorithm. Although the centralized solution shows
better efﬁciency in terms of blocking probability, ACO shows
great robustness and adaptability to varying network and trafﬁc
conditions. Additionally, in [83], a cognitive approach (case-
based reasoning) is introduced into the traditional RWA algo-
rithm for dynamic WRONs with the aim of reducing comput-
ing complexity. Simulation results indicate that taking advan-
tage of similar past experiences or cases stored in a knowledge
base (KB) can reduce computational time by 25% over clas-
sical RWA algorithms, while maintaining or even improving
performance. In addition, Kyriakopoulos et al. [81] propose a
heuristic method based on ACO to reduce network energy foot-
print by exploiting the basic principles of swarm intelligence for
ﬁnding the most energy-efﬁcient routes from source to the des-
tination node per trafﬁc request. A different ACO-based pro-
posal [82], which introduces a heuristic on the way ants choose
a request from demand space (those that can be served with
shorter route ﬁrst), outperforms both regular ACO and shortest-
path and most-used algorithms. Additionally, Ara´ujo et al. [89]
present a mechanism to estimate the blocking probability when
establishing lightpaths in an optical network. It consists of an
artiﬁcial neural network which uses as inputs topological prop-
erties and general physical layer characteristics (on which a
principal component analysis is previously carried out). Re-
sults show a speed-up greater than 7500 times than that of a
discrete event simulator, and accurate estimates are obtained
except when very small blocking probabilities are evaluated.
The RSA problem in EONs is NP-hard [123], and has also
been considered an appropriate candidate to be solved by meta-
heuristics. In fact, in the seminal paper by Christodoulopoulos
et al. [84] on elastic bandwidth allocation, simulated anneal-
ing is used to solve the RMLSA problem. Simulated annealing
has been also used by Perell´o et al. [85] in elastic networks
with space division multiplexing (SDM), where not only route,
modulation format, and spectrum have to be assigned but also
a ﬁber core, ﬁnally solving the route, modulation format, core,
and spectrum assignment (RMCSA).
In the context of evolutionary methods, the RMLSA prob-
lem has been solved by means of a GA where two populations
evolve in parallel and use a migration operation to exchange in-
dividuals between them [77]. Furthermore, the RSA problem
has also been solved in [78] with GAs for multicast ﬂows con-
sidering different selection and crossover strategies, and in [86]
with tabu search techniques with the aim of providing dedicated
8

path protection. Another coevolutive approach is introduced
in [80] to solve the RSA problem with joint anycast and uni-
cast demands, outperforming previous proposals based on tabu
search [87] and simulated annealing [124] approaches.
An alternative approach to solve the RSA problem in EONs
is presented in [88], where a backpropagation neural network
is proposed to improve the RSA algorithm by predicting the
arrival time and holding time of future connections by con-
sidering past experiences. Results conﬁrm this approach out-
performs RSA algorithms that do not make use of historical
information. A backpropagation neural network is also used
for trafﬁc prediction by Xiang et al. [128]. They propose this
technique in the context of centralized lightpath management
in inter-datacenter EONs, with the aim of reducing switching
power consumption by eliminating unnecessary lightpath ter-
mination and re-establishment operations. Another work, [79],
applies a Shannon entropy-based fragmentation metric to the
RSA problem in ﬂex-grid networking by utilizing two comple-
mentary approaches: minimum and maximum entropy. The
former allows to increase the number of demands that can be
served before reaching critical blocking levels by reducing as
much as possible spectrum fragmentation. The latter, where
source-destination pair bandwidth demands are located as far
apart from one another as possible across the optical spectrum
solved, employs a GA-based optimization in order to produce
useful insights into network design.
4.3. Network Reconﬁguration: Virtual Topologies
The virtual topology is the set of optical connections (or
lightpaths) established in a network. It does not have to be
statically conﬁgured, but it can be dynamically reconﬁgured in
order to better adapt to evolving trafﬁc demands with some ob-
jectives like reducing energy consumption, network congestion,
end-to-end delay or blocking probability or trying to ensure
quality of transmission (QoT), etc. For that purpose, two nature
inspired heuristics, GA and ACO, are used in [90] to obtain a
survivable mapping of a given WDM virtual topology. Feasi-
ble solutions are obtained even for large topologies when inte-
ger linear programming methods cannot. Also, a multiobjective
genetic algorithm to design virtual topologies with the aim of
reducing both the energy consumption and the network conges-
tion is presented by Fern´andez et al. [91]. The GA proposed
there is enhanced with the capability of remembering solutions
successfully used in the past, as well as connections with low
QoT. The incorporation of those mechanisms leads to improve-
ments in performance. Furthermore, the introduction of cogni-
tive techniques in virtual topology design also exhibits signiﬁ-
cant savings in terms of the total cost of ownership compared to
conventional methods. As a matter of fact, savings up to 20%
and 25% in capital and operational expenditures, respectively,
via a GA-based method, are demonstrated in [92]. One step
forward, the extension presented in [94] uses monitored data to
produce estimations that can help to anticipate changes in the
trafﬁc and proactively reconﬁgure the virtual network topology.
An algorithm to identify/locate failures in the virtual network
topology that can lead to an unacceptable quality of service is
proposed by Ruiz et al. [96]. They ﬁrst perform the experimen-
tal characterization of several causes of failure (which is done
with the help of a clustering algorithm), and then use those char-
acterizations to train a Bayesian network (BN). This trained BN
is used to localize and identify the most probable cause of fail-
ure impacting a given service.
A virtual network topology reconﬁguration approach is intro-
duced in [95]. It performs reconﬁgurations based on the trafﬁc
volume and direction predicted by an artiﬁcial neural network
proposed for every origin-destination pair. Periodically, col-
lected monitoring data are transformed into modelled data and
the artiﬁcial neural networks are used to predict the next-period
trafﬁc. Results show savings in both capital and operational
expenditures.
A different approach is followed in [93], where an efﬁcient
virtual network (VN) mapping for multicast services over both
general IP networks and orthogonal frequency division mul-
tiplexing (OFDM)-based EONs, is presented. This proposal
takes into consideration the max-min fairness in terms of re-
liability among distinct VNs. In the IP networks case and with
the aim to globally optimize the reliability and fairness of all
the multicast VN requests, a mixed integer linear programming
(MILP) model to determine the upper bound on the reliability is
presented, as well as a GA that addresses reliable multicast VN
mapping. For OFDM based EONs, this solution is extended
by considering the most efﬁcient modulation format selection
strategy, spectrum continuity, and conﬂict constraints.
4.4. Software Deﬁned Networking
The software deﬁned networking (SDN) paradigm [125],
which decouples control and data planes, and enables pro-
grammability on the former plane, has aroused the interest of
both industry and research communities by allowing networks
managers to manage, conﬁgure, automate and optimize net-
work resources via software. In the context of SDN over op-
tical networks, a correct mapping of the underlying topology at
the control plane level is crucial. Following this requirement,
a novel SDN-based cost-effective topology discovery method,
allowing transparent optical networks to automatically learn
physical adjacencies between optical devices, is introduced in
[99]. This is achieved by means of a test-signal mechanism
–by exchanging and verifying identiﬁer information between
discovery agents– and the OpenFlow protocol, resulting in cor-
rect mapping of the topologies in low total times. In relation
to this paradigm, fault tolerance is of paramount importance
when it comes to characterizing optical networks. In [97], an
efﬁcient cognitive process for failure detection in centralized
SDNs is proposed. Speciﬁcally, a network controller interacts
with optical cross-connects (OXCs) exchanging messages pe-
riodically to efﬁciently detect failures by using the link layer
discovery protocol (LLDP). Fast and accurate communication
of these link events to the controller allows a dynamic routing
algorithm to update the topology and restore the optical path in
a signiﬁcantly short space of time.
Furthermore, Oliveira et al. [100] introduce a transport SDN
controller that facilitates optical network virtualization and au-
tonomic/cognitive operation by means of two adaptive algo-
9

rithms that allow to reconﬁgure, on one hand, the transmis-
sion modulation format and spectrum utilization according to
network conditions and on the other hand, the attenuation ap-
plied at the ROADMs to improve the OSNR of the signals at
the reception. Yan et al. [102] propose and demonstrate in a
ﬁeld trial the planning of an SDN-based optical network uti-
lizing neural network-based methods, which are able to predict
link performance in correlation with the OSNR. By means of
probabilistic-shaping bandwidth variable transmitters (BVTs),
which are conﬁgured by the SDN controller based on these
predictions, spectral efﬁciency can be adapted, maximizing the
link capacity. Additionally, a new inter-networking paradigm
based on broker agents with cognitive intelligence that compete
to provide desirable inter-networking services to autonomous
systems through market-driven incentives, is proposed in [101].
4.5. Applications in Optical Burst Switching
Optical burst-switched (OBS) networks [2, Chap. 18] have
also taken advantage of artiﬁcial intelligence, and in particular,
of machine learning techniques. Praveen et al. [103] propose
a novel OBS architecture which takes advantages of learning
automata to achieve self-awareness, self-protection and self-
optimization, consequently reducing burst loss probability sig-
niﬁcantly. Work done in [103] has been extended in different
studies by using other machine learning techniques, such as Q-
learning, in order to solve the path and wavelength selection
problem [45], or by exploiting the feedback loop to control the
retransmission rate of bursts that are lost [104]. Moreover, vari-
ations of the TCP protocols to enhance the performance of OBS
networks, including supervised and unsupervised learning tech-
niques, are also proposed in [23].
Burst blocking or loss probability –the ratio of the number
of lost bursts to the total number of transmitted bursts– is com-
monly used for the performance measurement of OBS network
technologies. So far, proposed techniques have proven to be too
slow or not accurate enough to estimate this parameter. New
approaches based on machine learning have outperformed pre-
vious studies, especially in terms of computation time. Leung
et al. [108] present two models for burst loss ratio (BLR) esti-
mation employing neural networks based on the extreme learn-
ing machine (ELM) framework. By using these models, es-
timates can be obtained much faster than by means of simu-
lations. Moreover, the accuracy of the BLR estimates outper-
forms that obtained with an existing analytical approach and are
very close to the values obtained by simulation. Three cogni-
tive mechanisms –Bayesian networks, closed loop control and
open loop control– to decrease BLR in an OBS network are in-
troduced in [106]. Simulation results conﬁrm that the applica-
tion of these methods in the admission process leads to a BLR
reduction in OBS networks. Similarly, in [105] a novel node
degree dependent signalling algorithm in combination with Q-
learning is proposed as a low-complexity deﬂection routing pro-
tocol with the aim to resolve contention in OBS networks. This
solution scales well for large networks, since its complexity de-
pends on the node degree rather than network size. Simulation
results show that despite its lower complexity, burst loss prob-
ability of the proposed algorithm is comparable to other exist-
ing reinforcement learning-based deﬂection routing algorithms.
The previous work is extended in [107], where a framework
that adds intelligence to deﬂection routing in buffer-less archi-
tectures is presented. In particular, by means of the combina-
tion of the node degree-dependent signalling algorithm with a
feed-forward neural network (NN) and a feed-forward NN with
episodic updates, both containing Q-learning-based decision-
making modules, the proposed deﬂection routing protocols are
proved to achieve smaller burst-loss probabilities than previous
approaches while deﬂecting bursts less frequently. In addition,
the solution requires less memory and CPU resources, which
are more signiﬁcant as the size of the network grows. Addi-
tionaly, Coulibaly et al. [109] propose an ACO approach to re-
duce burst loss ratio, enhancing at the same time the delay, by
means of an adaptive and quality of service (QoS)-aware route,
wavelength and timeslot assignment algorithm.
4.6. Applications in Passive Optical Networks (PONs)
Network planning of passive optical networks (PONs) [2,
Chap. 5] has also taken advantage of AI techniques. Villalba
et al. [110] propose a GA for topology searching and splitter
placement in these networks. A graph representation scheme,
associated with a street map, is used as a reference, and the for-
mulation minimizes the amount of optical cabling and number
of splitters and power budget. Besides, Kokangul [111] pro-
poses a GA and mathematical modeling techniques to optimize
the position of the primary and secondary nodes (i.e., the points
where the signal is split the ﬁrst and the second time, respec-
tively), their split levels, the association of customers to sec-
ondary nodes, and the association of secondary nodes to pri-
mary nodes. This placement is done under constraints such as
attenuations and characteristics of the optical devices. Liu et
al. [112] propose a topology optimization model in long-reach
passive optical networks (LR-PON) using a nested genetic al-
gorithm (NGA). The outer-loop of the NGA algorithm deals
with the location of splitters and the inner-loop of the algorithm
builds the spanning tree. Bhatt et al. [119] propose a teaching-
learning based optimization (TLBO) algorithm to reduce the
required optical network units (ONUs) that assure connectivity
among wireless routers and ONUs in a Fiber-Wireless network.
Results of the simulations carried out for different grid sizes of
the geographical area and variable wireless routers conﬁrm that
the implemented scheme requires less ONUs, reaching a glob-
ally optimum solution that previous random and deterministic
approaches failed to provide. Along the same line, other non-
deterministic approaches for placement of ONUs also provide
desired levels of performance, e.g., using genetic algorithms
[120].
Other research works focus on the diagnosis and the self-
diagnosis of PONs. As an example, Gosselin et al. [19, 98]
propose probabilistic modeling and machine learning for fault
diagnosis in optical access networks. The proposal is based on
a Bayesian network which encodes expert knowledge. Indeed,
they develop a Bayesian inference engine, named probabilistic
tool for GPON-FTTH access network self-diagnosis (PANDA),
to efﬁciently allow fault diagnosis in GPONs. Sarigiannidis
10

et al. [126] propose a 10-gigabit-capable PON (XG-PON) to-
gether with multiple long term evolution (LTE) radio access
networks in the fronthaul.
The mechanism receives trafﬁc-
aware knowledge from the SDN controllers and it modiﬁes the
uplink-downlink conﬁguration in the LTE radio communica-
tion. This strategy allows to calculate an optimal conﬁguration
based on the trafﬁc dynamics in the global network, allowing
for an improvement in the packet latency and jitter.
Additional research is focused on assuring quality of service
(QoS) requirements and media access control (MAC) issues in
PONs. Some approaches apply GAs to deal with these issues.
As an example, Huang [113] proposes to balance asymmetric
trafﬁc load between ONUs in PON architectures using a GA,
which also decreases congestion in ONUs. Besides, Hwang et
al. [116] formulate a genetic expression programming (GEP)
algorithm for the QoS trafﬁc prediction integrated with the lim-
ited packet transmission strategy to deal with the queue vari-
ation and as a consequence with the reduction of the delay of
high priority trafﬁc. In addition, Moradpoor et al. [114] pro-
pose a dynamic excess bandwidth allocation algorithm for an
integrated hybrid PON with wireless technology employing a
GA. The algorithm is able to provide optimal/near-optimal so-
lutions for the excess bandwidth assignment in this converged
network scenario.
Other approaches implement proportional-integral-derivative
(PID) controllers combined with GA or ANN techniques to
comply with QoS requirements. Thus, Jim´enez et al. [115]
develop an automatic tuning technique based on GA to tune a
proportional controller to provide delay guarantees. In addition,
they integrate a dynamic admission control module to transmit
or drop packets in order to achieve a better delay control. Be-
sides, same authors in [117] propose a PID controller integrated
with an ANN to efﬁciently ensure QoS bandwidth requirements
in EPONs. Finally, Dias et al. [118] propose a dynamic band-
width allocation algorithm which uses Bayesian estimation to
estimate the average interarrival time of packets at the ONUs,
with the aim of minimizing the queuing delay introduced by the
sleep- and doze-mode operations.
4.7. Applications in Intra-Datacenter networking
Intra-datacenter (DC) networks are also embracing machine
learning techniques in order to improve performance.
For
instance, in hybrid-switching-based DCs, where an electrical
packet-switched and an optical circuit-switched network live
together, machine learning-based ﬂow classiﬁcation may be a
decisive solution to improve speed and accuracy, besides im-
proving adaptability to trafﬁc dynamics. As an example, Raste-
garfar et al. [39] have proposed a multi-layer perceptron to al-
locate resources to TCP ﬂows according to their requirements
(e.g., allocating optical circuits to bulk data transfer and map-
ping short mice ﬂows to electrical switches), and have obtained
very signiﬁcant improvements in network throughput due to
both optical channel bandwidth consolidation and adaptive ﬂow
classiﬁcation. Furthermore, a neural network ﬂow classiﬁer at
the edge of the network, combined with an SDN centralized
controller able to take advantage of this classiﬁcation outcome
along with its global view of the resources has been proposed in
[121]. Finally, Wang and Javidi [122] have also recently con-
sidered the end-to-end scheduling problem in all-optical data
centers networks, whose main challenges are the bufferless na-
ture and the nonzero reconﬁguration delay of optical switches,
making it necessary to use a centralized controller that can ef-
ﬁciently schedule the end-to-end transmissions. The proposed
method employs an adaptive Markov scheduling policy, which
makes decisions every time slot, and determines both the sched-
ule and the time to reconﬁgure the schedule based on the most
recent queue length information.
5. New Opportunities and Challenges for the Use of AI in
Optical Networks
In this section, we describe a number of new opportunities
and challenges that we envision in the area of optical systems
and networking. We envision increasingly challenging roles of
the use of AI in the physical layer, where it will continue be-
ing a useful tool not only in the framework of emerging optical
transmission technologies but also in helping increasing secu-
rity by means of attack or intrusion detection and localization.
We also describe the relevant role of AI in the automation of
network management operations, and in the support of emerg-
ing networking paradigms.
5.1. Optical Transmission Systems, and Attack and Intrusion
Detection
Many control decisions in a network are made based on accu-
rate measurement or estimation of physical parameters. Thus,
in line with the advances reported in Section 3, we expect AI
will continue playing an important role in supporting emerg-
ing transmission technologies like space division multiplexing,
multimode/multicore ﬁbers and advanced modulation formats
and constellation shaping. We also expect further progresses in
the use of AI techniques for QoT estimation and performance
monitoring. However, a key area closely related to monitor-
ing where we see a signiﬁcant opportunity for AI techniques,
but have not yet emerged (to the best of our knowledge) in the
optical arena, is that of attack and intrusion detection.
Increasing Internet proliferation has driven businesses and
other institutions to provide essential services over the Internet
infrastructure. As a result, these entities have to contend with
higher risk and potential costs associated with data breaches,
which is currently estimated to be as high as $3.6 million [129]
on average. The optical network layer is also suceptible to at-
tacks by malicious entities, which can be broadly classiﬁed as
disruption and eavesdropping attacks. Disruption attacks at-
tempt to exploit physical characteristics of optical transmission
to degrade the operation of existing services and/or block in-
coming service requests, while eavesdropping attacks are tar-
geted towards gaining unauthorized access to the data transmit-
ted over the optical network. A variety of attack vectors for both
these attack categories have been outlined in [130, 131, 132].
Addressing attacks on optical infrastructure consists of
mechanisms to detect and localize an attack on the optical in-
frastructure, and the mitigation mechanisms in response to a
11

detected attack. Statistical approaches using optical measure-
ments to identify and localize attacks in optical networks have
been proposed in [133, 134] and can be employed to detect a
range of attacks on the optical network infrastructure. However,
the computation complexity involved in applying the proposed
techniques in a large-scale network is non-trivial. Therefore,
AI techniques could be applied in this context to identify and
localize optical attacks.
On successful identiﬁcation of attacks, mitigation tech-
niques, especially in the context of optical telecommunication
networks involves all-optical encryption or re-routing of trafﬁc
away from attack locations. The application of AI for network
optimization and RWA problems has already been discussed in
Sections 4.1 to 4.3, and can be employed to move vulnerable
optical trafﬁc away form attack locations.
5.2. Automating Network Management Operations
In the area of optical network operation, heterogeneous
(multi-technology and multi-vendor) network devices make op-
eration, administration and maintenance of optical networks a
complex and challenging process. This is due to the fact that
network state information, e.g., topology, congestion, failure
discovery, etc., collected from different devices have different
and limited state information, which pose a big challenge in
data collection, processing and decision making. Thus, pro-
cess automation has been identiﬁed as a key enabler for driving
down operational costs, and also to help move human intelli-
gence away from repetitive tasks [135]. AI-based techniques
are seen as a key enabler for automating network management
operations [136, 137], and cognitive optical networks were in
fact proposed with that aim [13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18] but many
open issues remain. The primary pre-requisite for automating
network operations is the capability to efﬁciently collect and
analyze telemetry information from the network. SDN and re-
lated standards have introduced streaming telemetry which can
be used to efﬁciently collect information from the network all
the way to the network edge. The scale of information col-
lected in a large telco [138] poses a challenge for processing
and identifying anomalies such as network mis-conﬁgurations,
alarm-correlation, failure localization and prediction. AI-based
techniques can be efﬁciently used to target these problems at
scale, especially when combined with Big Data frameworks
like the Apache Hadoop [139] or Spark [140] ecosystems. An-
other key enabler for automating network management involves
the use of declarative intents which provide a syntax for users to
describe their requirements to network orchestration platforms
[141, 142]. Intents are widely employed in natural language
processing (NLP) and AI-based techniques from these domains
can be used to integrate user interaction platforms such as chat-
bots, voice command devices, etc., to interpret user requests
into intents for network orchestration platforms. As discussed
in [137] AI-based techniques can also be used to learn and au-
tomate the process orchestration workﬂow for incoming intent
requests, while retaining the possibility of human intervention
in the control loop.
The widespread deployment of SDN, coupled with a
telemetry-driven feedback loop, would reduce the barrier
for automating network control operations.
AI-based tech-
niques presented in Section 4.2 can then be used to optimize
RWA/RMLSA/RMCSA problems,
performing in-operation
planning to optimize resources based on existing optical service
demands. As AI-based techniques in the area of network con-
trol and management mature, we can also expect advanced ap-
plications such as preemptive relocation of services away from
a predicted failure in the network, a topic in which ﬁrst steps
have already been taken [143, 144, 145, 146]. As outlined in
Section 4, network virtualization and reconﬁguration could also
take advantage of AI-based techniques by utilizing trafﬁc pre-
diction and classiﬁcation, with or without SDN controller in
the loop. Nevertheless, the introduction of ﬂex-grid devices,
such as bandwidth-variable sliceable transponders and WSSs,
and space division multiplexing techniques based on multi-core
or few-/multi-mode ﬁbers have further increased the compu-
tation complexity of AI-enabled RWA/RMLSA/RMCSA opti-
mization solutions [137]. Nevertheless, AI-based techniques,
especially deep learning, will play a major role in optical net-
work planning and reconﬁguration, since optical devices are ex-
pected to imbibe more autonomous programmability features in
the next decade.
5.3. Efﬁcient Joint Operation of Networks and Computing Re-
sources
Emerging paradigms like the Internet of things (IoT), Indus-
try 4.0 or the tactile Internet [147], impose stringent require-
ments on networks, such as low latency, and high bandwidth,
availability and security, thus posing a signiﬁcant challenge.
The combination of 5G mobile communications systems with
high-speed fault-tolerant ﬁber backhaul infrastructures will be
key enabling technologies for these networks [147]. End-to-
end latency for some applications can be limited to few mil-
liseconds (e.g., 1 ms for tactile internet). Thus, the distance
between the edge and computing resources must be limited to
some tens of kilometers [148], and a decentralized service plat-
form architecture based on Mobile Edge Computing (MEC) or
Fog Computing (FC) is required. However, the integration of
various computing paradigms (MEC, Fog and cloud) involves
the development of integrated resource management, task al-
location and failure handling techniques, to name just a few.
Therefore, the joint allocation of computing and networking re-
sources (also including inter-datacenter networking) is receiv-
ing increasing attention.
AI is expected to play a key role to facilitate efﬁcient joint
operation of network and computing devices, performing tasks
like virtual network function (VNF) distribution, task alloca-
tion, predictive caching and interpolation/extrapolation of hu-
man actions, and thus enhancing performance and providing
better support for IoT and tactile Internet applications. For in-
stance, along this line, a recent work by Wong et al. [148] has
proposed a novel tactile Internet capable PON and a dynamic
wavelength and bandwidth allocation method, which incorpo-
rates a mechanism to predict the trafﬁc load to vary the number
of active wavelength channels in the network, and prioritize the
transmission of tactile Internet trafﬁc (vs. other trafﬁc) to com-
ply with delay requirements. Due to the huge expansion of IoT
12

applications and services, we envision more advances to come
along this line in the next years.
5.4. Applications in On-Chip Networks
Finally, another promising ﬁeld of application in our opinion
is that of on-chip networks. Today, major tech companies like
Google, Microsoft, Intel, etc. are pushing chip manufacturing
to enable AI computing on a single chip. On-chip networks
provide communication substrates for the constantly increasing
number of cores on a single chip. Generally, on-chip networks
are designed to enable efﬁcient computing in less time while
consuming less power. Though it is early days in chip manu-
facturing to bring AI-enabled on-chip networks in market, re-
cently Google has come up with its own AI chip, known as Ten-
sor Processing Unit (TPU), which allows TensorFlow (a deep
neural network software) to run. Similarly, Intel announced
an experimental chip called “Loihi”, which is designed based
on neuromorphic technology that uses neurons instead of logic
gates. AI algorithms are known for time and computation com-
plexity, thus requiring multiple central and graphical processing
units, therefore AI-enabled optical network on-chip (ONoC) is
an alternative to the electronic NoC which will further reduce
the power consumption and computation time. For instance,
Gu et al. [149] have recently proposed an optical network on-
chip architecture by combining TDM and WDM technologies.
This novel architecture allows to solve the blocking problem
faced by previously proposed optical circuit-switching (OCS)
based ones [150]. Speciﬁcally, as an aspect of special inter-
est for the subject of this article, the number of wavelength
groups and time slots is optimized by using a genetic algorithm,
which helps TDM-WDM-based ONoC to outperform results
from equivalent proposals based on OCS-mesh.
6. Summary
This paper has provided a comprehensive survey of the cur-
rent research within the application of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(AI) techniques in optical networks, as well as an overview of
opportunities and challenges arising in this context.
In order to provide the reader with a clear and general vi-
sion of the numerous techniques and methods that make up this
scientiﬁc discipline, we have ﬁrst described those AI subﬁelds
that have been successfully employed in optical networking: (1)
search methods and optimization theory, (2) game theory, (3)
knowledge-based, reasoning and planning methods, (4) statis-
tical models, (5) decision-making algorithms, and (6) learning
methods, and have classiﬁed relevant literature in the diagram
shown in Figure 1.
Later on, we have extensively reviewed the application of
these techniques in order to improve the efﬁciency of both opti-
cal transmission (Table 1), and the design and control of optical
networks (Tables 2 and 3). Speciﬁcally, in relation to optical
transmission, we have addressed the suitability of AI techniques
when dealing with the characterization and operation of trans-
mitters, EDFAs and receivers, as well as for performance mon-
itoring, mitigation of nonlinearities, and for QoT estimation,
which is particularly relevant in impairment-aware optical net-
work operation. In many cases, AI techniques have proven to
be more efﬁcient than classical approaches, which are typically
limited by the complexity, lack of adaptability, and/or scalabil-
ity of the deterministic or semi-analytical models on which they
rely. AI techniques provide similar advantages in issues related
to the control and design of optical networks. The thorough
review of the state of the art in this matter has included numer-
ous applications in the following ﬁelds: optical network plan-
ning, connection establishment (i.e., the pursuit of the optimal
solution for the RWA, RSA, RMLSA or RMCSA problems),
network reconﬁguration, software-deﬁned networking and ap-
plications in speciﬁc types of networks such as OBS networks,
Passive Optical Networks and data centers.
In general, AI techniques’ ability to ﬁnd optimal or near-
optimal solutions in highly complex scenarios (i.e., problems
with very high dimensionality, fed with huge amounts of data)
without the need to develop exhaustive analytical or semi-
analytical models, makes them essential to meet the challenge
posed by the increased complexity and dynamism of current
optical communication networks, which need to face, among
other impairments, the physical limitations imposed by noise
and nonlinear distortions. No less important is AI techniques’
ability to adapt to changing conditions, to learn from them and
to propose solutions to unexpected situations or cases, turning
them into promising candidates to, for example, reconﬁgure
these dynamic networks in short time scales in order to meet
changing demand patterns.
Last but not least, we have described a number of oppor-
tunities and challenges that we envision in the area of opti-
cal networking. In the context of optical transmission, we ex-
pect AI will continue playing a crucial role in supporting tech-
nologies like space division multiplexing, multimode/multicore
ﬁbers, advanced modulation formats and constellation shaping,
etc. Notwithstanding, the role that AI can play in attack and
intrusion detection in optical networks seems of special rele-
vance and has not yet been signiﬁcantly explored to the best of
our knowledge. Furthermore, the automation of network man-
agement operations, especially in the current context of net-
works becoming increasingly heterogeneous, and the efﬁcient
joint operation of networks and MEC/fog/cloud computing re-
sources, together with on-chip networking are, in our opinion,
ﬁelds where AI can be decisive.
Acknowledgment
This work has been partially supported by the Spanish Min-
istry of Economy and Competitiveness (TEC2014-53071-C3-
2-P, TEC2015-71932-REDT).
