Electronic Geometry Textbook: A Geometric
Textbook Knowledge Management System⋆
Xiaoyu Chen
LMIB – SKLSDE – School of Mathematics and Systems Science,
Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
Abstract. Electronic Geometry Textbook is a knowledge management
system that manages geometric textbook knowledge to enable users to
construct and share dynamic geometry textbooks interactively and ef-
ﬁciently. Based on a knowledge base organizing and storing the knowl-
edge represented in speciﬁc languages, the system implements interfaces
for maintaining the data representing that knowledge as well as rela-
tions among those data, for automatically generating readable documents
for viewing or printing, and for automatically discovering the relations
among knowledge data. An interface has been developed for users to
create geometry textbooks with automatic checking, in real time, of the
consistency of the structure of each resulting textbook. By integrating
an external geometric theorem prover and an external dynamic geometry
software package, the system oﬀers the facilities for automatically prov-
ing theorems and generating dynamic ﬁgures in the created textbooks.
This paper provides a comprehensive account of the current version of
Electronic Geometry Textbook.
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
When we speak about managing knowledge, we may start by thinking about
textbooks, where knowledge is organized systematically and presented hierar-
chically according to its internal logical relations. Since textbooks provide a
well-arranged structure of domain knowledge, they play an important role in
education and research; they record knowledge and impart it to new learners.
The Electronic Geometry Textbook (EGT) is a knowledge management system
for geometric knowledge, built so that users may construct and publish dynamic
geometry textbooks interactively and eﬃciently. The objective of our textbook
project is to explore the approaches to managing knowledge by integrating avail-
able software tools and providing a system that assists human authors to create
dynamic, interactive, and machine-processable textbooks (instead of the tradi-
tional static textbooks). EGT is motivated by the following three considerations:
(1) Textbooks are a standard form for the storage, organization, and presen-
tation of systematic domain knowledge. For diﬀerent pedagogical purposes, the
⋆The ﬁnal publication of this paper is available at www.springerlink.com.
arXiv:1005.0080v1  [cs.AI]  1 May 2010

same knowledge may be adopted by diﬀerent textbooks as a part of the theo-
ries involved. In order to share and reuse sophisticated knowledge, we need to
build up a standard knowledge base that stores and organizes data describing
the textbook knowledge. Authors can contribute knowledge (as data encoded
in some knowledge representation format) to the knowledge base and construct
textbooks by reusing pieces of knowledge already in the knowledge base as con-
stituents in a new textbook.
EGT oﬀers such an environment that maintains (i.e., creates, removes, mod-
iﬁes, and queries, etc.) and shares knowledge data with an appropriate granular-
ity, constructs textbooks by interactively arranging the knowledge data selected
and retrieved from the knowledge base, and automatically generates styled doc-
uments for browsing and printing the textbooks produced.
(2) When creating a textbook for learners, one needs to determine an appro-
priate narrative structure so as to arrange the contents involved in the textbook.
Although one can make one’s own decision as to what knowledge is to be chosen,
there are common practices and implicit conventions in a scientiﬁc community as
to how knowledge should be organized, formulated, and presented. For example,
it is commonly accepted that a proved proposition is a lemma only if it is used
in the proof of a theorem and a corollary is a true proposition that follows from
a theorem. The domain knowledge presented in a textbook should be structured
systematically, hierarchically, and logically, i.e., from the simplest to the most
complicated and from the basic to the advanced. For example, the deﬁnition for
each concept in a statement (such as a theorem, exercise, or example statement)
should have been given before the statement. In order to produce such a sound
and usable textbook, we need to be given feedback if the narrative structure
disobeys the conventional rules during the process of construction.
EGT oﬀers such a facility that assists a user to automatically check, in real
time, whether the constructed textbook has a satisﬁable and reasonable narrative
structure.
(3) In recent years, many creative methods have been proposed for auto-
mated geometry theorem proving, such as algebraic approaches (the most pow-
erful, although just decision methods) which convert the problem of geometrical
reasoning to that of solving algebraic systems, coordinate-free approaches which
convert the problem to the counterpart of algebraic calculation with respect to
some geometric quantities, and traditional AI approaches. [6] Many geometry
software tools have implemented these approaches and provided the functional-
ity of automated reasoning, such as GEOTHER [12], Geometry Expert [10], and
GCLC [8], and of interactive proving, such as GeoProof [11]. These tools not
only help geometry researchers to discover new and more valuable and complex
theorems, but also support geometry education. Geometry textbooks include
many interesting and complicated theorems whose proofs are given and checked
by the authors. As the traditional formal logical methods do not work very
eﬃciently in automated geometry deduction, the techniques for automated geo-
metric proof checking have not been well developed. However, it is still helpful
to make use of the automated theorem provers to assist an author to determine

whether a proposition written in a textbook is logically true in order to ensure
the correctness of the textbook.
In addition, geometry deals with graphical objects abstracted from the real
visual world. Intuitive ﬁgures are indispensable constituents of textbooks. With
the help of a computer, one can draw high-resolution and accurate ﬁgures in-
teractively by using a mouse and following the instructions provided during the
construction. For instance, after selecting two points and an instruction “make
the mid-point of two points” by using a mouse, the mid-point will be constructed
and displayed in the ﬁgure. An even more important enhancement resulting from
this interactive facility is that the steps of constructing a ﬁgure can be recorded
and redone quickly. For example, as a result one drags a free point from one
place to another and the ﬁgure will be updated immediately. One can explore a
ﬁgure and experience what happens when components are moved. This dynamic
feature makes geometry more vivid. Dynamic geometry software has been de-
veloped to implement these features and applied in geometry education and
research, such as Cabri [2], SketchPad [19], Cinderella [7], and GeoGebra [9]. It
is useful to apply dynamic geometry software to make the ﬁgures in textbooks
more intuitive and explorable than the traditional static ones.
EGT oﬀers interfaces to knowledge data and to selected external geometry
software packages for proving theorems and generating dynamic ﬁgures auto-
matically.
1.2
Originality
The idea of designing and developing such an integrated software system in
the form of a textbook for systematic and interactive management of geomet-
ric knowledge originates from Dongming Wang [4] who has been working on
automated geometric reasoning for the last two decades. The author has been
stimulated to elaborate the idea and to undertake the implementation of a sys-
tem himself. We consider geometry a unique and rich subject of mathematics
that should be chosen for study in the context of knowledge management. In
such a study, the full power of computers for symbolic, numeric, and graphical
computing and data processing may be used and our ideas may be eﬀectively
tested.
Several e-learning and intelligent tutoring systems for mathematics have been
proposed and developed, such as LeActiveMath [16], ActiveMath [1], and Math-
Dox [17]. They oﬀer facilities for generating courseware which adapts to stu-
dents, tutoring students interactively with diagnoses of mistakes and adaptive
feedback, analyzing and evaluating students’ abilities, etc. These systems are
learner-centred and support the learner’s initiative. However, EGT is designed
mainly to assist human authors in constructing dynamic textbooks. The process
is mostly author-driven and manipulations of the textbook are allowed and may
lead to new, modiﬁed, or improved versions of a textbook. EGT’s innovations
may be seen in the following three aspects:
1. EGT products can be viewed or printed as traditional textbooks (static
documents) and also run as dynamic software on a computer. Textbook

knowledge is shared at an appropriate granularity and textbooks can be
constructed and maintained interactively. For example, a textbook can be
seen as an arrangement of nodes that refer to the corresponding textbook
contents. One can perform a series of manipulations adding, inserting, re-
moving, modifying, and restructuring the nodes involved, and meanwhile the
generated documents for browsing and printing can be updated automati-
cally;
2. EGT can assist users to analyze the narrative structure of the textbooks con-
structed and automatically ﬁnd the parts inconsistent with the conventional
rules for writing textbooks, in real time. We call this process consistency-
checking of the structure of the textbook. For example, the deﬁnition of a
median of a triangle can be created only if the deﬁnition of midpoint of a
segment has already been introduced in the textbook;
3. EGT integrates stand-alone geometry software packages for automated the-
orem proving and dynamic ﬁgure generation. This provides the constructed
textbooks with dynamic features. For example, the theorems in the text-
books can be automatically proved by invoking geometric theorem provers,
and the ﬁgures are automatically constructed by applying dynamic geometry
software.
This paper describes the relevant design principles of EGT including archi-
tectural issues, the structure of the geometric knowledge base, knowledge rep-
resentation, and the communication with available geometry software packages.
We present the main features of the current version of EGT including maintain-
ing geometric knowledge data for constructing textbooks interactively, rendering
the textbooks in readable documents both in English and Chinese, proving the
theorems and drawing the dynamic ﬁgures automatically by interfacing with
the selected geometry software packages. While plane Euclidean geometry is the
target of our current investigation, the ideas also apply to, or invite the attempt
to apply them to, other geometries.
2
Design Principles of Electronic Geometry Textbook
We describe the architecture of the system and present the main design principles
for a geometric textbook knowledge base and the representation of knowledge.
More details about the design methodology have been discussed in [5].
2.1
Architecture and Communication
Now we give a bird’s eye view of how the system works and which compo-
nents carry out which tasks. In what follows, we refer to Fig. 1 which gives
an overview over the EGT components and their communications. The textbook
knowledge base is the kernel component of the system, storing and organizing
the shared knowledge data. Via the user interface, users can construct textbooks
by invoking the manipulation module to perform the manipulations of creating

new knowledge data, retrieving needed knowledge data, and modifying knowl-
edge data on the textbook knowledge base. Meanwhile, the consistency-checking
module will check the consistency of the constructed textbooks in real time and
provide feedback to the user interface. The textbooks constructed can be pre-
sented in readable documents for rendering in a browser or printing on paper.
The theorems in the constructed textbooks can be proved and dynamic ﬁg-
ures can be drawn automatically by interfacing with external geometry software
packages.
Fig. 1. Architecture of the Electronic Geometry Textbook system
From the description of the system, we can conclude that the system has as
its foundation a textbook knowledge base. To manipulate knowledge eﬃciently
and appropriately, one main task is creating a well-structured, manageable, and
suitable knowledge base. On the other hand, to communicate knowledge, for-
malizing and representing knowledge as data in a processable way is the other
main task.
2.2
Design of Geometric Textbook Knowledge Base
Generally speaking, the design of a knowledge base involves the following two
aspects.
Knowledge Data Granularity. While creating a textbook, the author should
identify the objects of domain knowledge, categorize them, and rank them ac-
cording to their relationships. In order to support the manipulations of con-

structing dynamic textbooks interactively, we need to encapsulate knowledge
data at an appropriate granularity. If the granularity is too ﬁne, the process of
constructing textbooks may be too complicated to manage. If the granularity is
not ﬁne enough, the process may be trivial and not subject to manipulation.
We use the notion of a knowledge object to represent the unit of textbook
knowledge which can be recognized, diﬀerentiated, understood, and manipu-
lated while constructing textbooks. For example, the deﬁnition of a concept is a
knowledge object which gives meaning to the concept; a theorem is a knowledge
object which is a true proposition in the domain; a proof demonstrates that a
proposition is true; an exercise or example needs to be solved by applying some
knowledge. Working from the common or implicit conventions in traditional
textbooks, we classify the knowledge objects into the following types: Concept
(Deﬁnition), Axiom, Lemma, Theorem, Corollary, Conjecture, Proof, Problem,
Example, Exercise, Solution, Algorithm, Introduction, and Remark. Although
this classiﬁcation may be argued over and needs to be justiﬁed, what is essential
in our approach is to encapsulate knowledge data into certain knowledge objects
with the same structure. Within diﬀerent types of knowledge objects, certain
data items are created to store knowledge data for diﬀerent applications on the
objects. For example, the data stored in a data item naturalRepresentation is
used for presentation, the data stored in algebraicRepresentation is used for au-
tomatic proving by algebraic methods, the data stored in diagramInstruction is
used for automatic dynamic ﬁgure drawing, etc. One may refer to [3] for the
details of the design of the structure within each type of knowledge object.
For a textbook, the index is an important component; it allows a reader to
see what is included and to navigate within the textbook. We use category to
represent such a hierarchical structure so that a category object has a group of
subcategories or knowledge objects as its members. For example, each chapter
in the textbook is a category which usually has subcategories of sections, and
each section may include a group of knowledge objects. The categories should
usually be contributed by the authors using their comprehensive understanding
of the domain knowledge.
The textbook can be viewed as a linear arrangement of knowledge objects
and categories. The process of constructing textbooks can be viewed as a series
of manipulations (adding, inserting, removing, modifying, and restructuring) of
these knowledge objects and categories.
Relations. Geometric knowledge is accumulated step by step, e.g., by intro-
ducing new concepts using already deﬁned concepts, deriving useful properties
about new concepts, and proving or discovering theorems relating old and new
concepts. It does not lie ﬂat but is piled up with a certain intrinsic structure of
hierarchy. Some knowledge pieces serve as preliminaries for higher-level knowl-
edge. The conventional rules for writing textbooks depend on the relationships
of the knowledge involved. Therefore, the relations among category objects and
knowledge objects must be captured to deﬁne the structure of the geometric text-

book knowledge base, and then to assist users to perform consistency-checking
of the structure of textbooks.
The relations we are interested in may involve the consideration of, and ab-
stractions from, pedagogical rules and textbook writing conventions. We have
identiﬁed 17 types of relations among knowledge objects and category objects:
Inclusion (→include), Context (→contextOf), Inheritance (→inherit), Derivation
(→deriveFrom), Implication (→imply), Property (→hasProperty), Decision (→decide),
Justiﬁcation (→justify), Introduction (→introduce), Remark (→remarkOn), Compli-
cation (→complicate), Solution (→solve), Application (→applyOn), Equality (↔equal),
Exercise (→exerciseOf), Example (→exampleOf), Association (↔associate).
The conventional rules for writing textbooks can be written with these re-
lations. For example, a relation D →contextOf T (where D is a deﬁnition and
T is a theorem) means D provides the context for T. The rule that D should
be presented before T in the textbook can be derived from the meaning of the
Context relation. Therefore, if D is arranged after T when a user constructs a
textbook, then the structure of the textbook is inconsistent and needs to be re-
structured. In [15], F. Kamareddine et al. present an ontology and an associated
markup system for annotating mathematical documents so that the graph of log-
ical precedences (the conventional rules in our context) of the annotated parts
of text can be acquired and analyzed automatically. However, we are concerned
with not only how to acquire these rules but also how to make use of them to
decide whether a textbook is constructed in an appropriate and soundly pre-
sented structure, i.e., whether the structure of the textbook is consistent. The
inconsistencies found by the current system are limited to those disobeying the
rules derived from the existing relations.
The geometric textbook knowledge base is then created to store textbook
knowledge data, with well-deﬁned structures for the types of, and relations be-
tween, the knowledge data stored.
2.3
Knowledge Representation
The knowledge data stored in the data items of knowledge objects will be ap-
plied in diﬀerent situations. One important application is to communicate with
external geometry software packages. It is necessary to represent the geometric
statements of the involved knowledge objects in a formal language and to trans-
form them automatically into equivalent ones that the target geometry software
packages can identify and manipulate via speciﬁc interfaces. The Intergeo project
[13] is an ongoing European project, one of whose objectives is to attack the bar-
rier of lack of interoperability by oﬀering a common ﬁle format for specifying
dynamic ﬁgures. However, we have designed a geometry programming language
in which one can easily specify geometric statements of deﬁnitions, theorems,
axioms, and problems, etc. by using customized concepts. We have also imple-
mented automatic translation of this language into the native languages of the
geometry software packages targeted for communication. We present some ex-
amples using this language here and describe how to process this language in
Section 3.4.

Simson’s theorem in English is “The feet of the perpendiculars from a point
to the three sides of a triangle are collinear if and only if the point lies on the
circumcircle.”
The formal representation of Simson’s theorem is “A := point(); B := point();
C := point(); D := point(); incident(D, circumcircle(triangle(A, B, C))) ⇔
collinear(foot(D, line(A, B)), foot(D, line(B, C)), foot(D, line(A, C))).”
The intersection point of two lines l and m is deﬁned as
“intersection(l, m) ≜[A::Point where incident(A, l) ∧incident(A, m)].”
3
Technical Realization of Electronic Geometry Textbook
In this section, we present the technical details of implementing the components
of the Electronic Geometry Textbook system.
3.1
Creation of the Geometric Textbook Knowledge Base
The textbook knowledge base stores the knowledge data of knowledge objects
and category objects, as well as their relations. These objects are the units that
may be managed, retrieved, and processed by the other modules. In order to
identify and distinguish them, the system automatically assigns each object a
unique objectID. Then relational tables are deﬁned that specify how data items
are related with the objects and what the relations among these objects are.
[3] We have created a database containing these tables in MS SQL Server and
chosen Java as the programming language to develop the interfaces for users to
maintain the knowledge data of the Concept (Deﬁnition), Axiom, Lemma, The-
orem, Corollary, Conjecture, Problem, Example, Exercise, Proof, Solution, In-
troduction, Remark, and Category objects as well as their relations. Our system
employs several external packages for editing speciﬁc data. The dynamic mathe-
matics software GeoGebra is used for producing dynamic ﬁgures. The MathDox
formula editor [18] is used to create expressions encoded in OpenMath for the
algebraic representations. One can construct, for example, Simson’s theorem
as in Fig. 2.
Currently, the system provides simple query services for users who may input
search commands and view the results using keywords and relations. The queries
through relations work at the level of knowledge objects and category objects.
This means that the queries need to be described by using the objectIDs of
the objects but not simple natural texts. We explain the commands for queries
below.
– keyWords[word1, . . . , wordn] returns the set of knowledge objects and cat-
egory objects with keywords word1 and . . . and wordn.
– relation[*, objectID, relationType] returns the set of knowledge objects
that are each in the relation of relationType to the knowledge object identi-
ﬁed by objectID;

Fig. 2. Constructing Simson’s theorem object
– relation[objectID, *, relationType] returns the set of knowledge objects
such that the knowledge object identiﬁed by objectID is in the relation of
relationType with each of them.
The relations among knowledge objects and category objects are very im-
portant for structuring the knowledge base. One way to acquire the relations
is manual annotation through reference to the objectIDs of the corresponding
objects. We have implemented another way that the system can automatically
discover the Context and Inheritance relations by matching the concept declara-
tions with the instances used in the formal representations of knowledge objects.
For example, in the process of constructing Simson’s theorem, the deﬁnitions
of point, line, foot, triangle, circumcircle are automatically found that
provide the context for Simson’s theorem. The system will list the relations
discovered for the user to select. (see Fig. 3)
3.2
User Interface of Electronic Geometry Textbook
With the textbook knowledge base created, a user interface is implemented for
users to construct dynamic textbooks, which are rendered as trees. The cate-
gory objects are rendered as branch nodes and knowledge objects are rendered
as tree leaves. Via dialogs, one can construct textbooks interactively by adding,
inserting, removing, modifying, and rearranging the category objects and knowl-
edge objects, and annotating their relations one by one. These objects may be

Fig. 3. Discovering the Context relations automatically
newly created in, or fetched from, the knowledge base. While performing these
manipulations, the system can check automatically whether the structure of the
current textbook is consistent. The user may be given tips if it is inconsistent and
the textbook should be restructured until it becomes consistent. For example,
if one places Simson’s theorem before the deﬁnition of foot (which provides
the context for Simson’s theorem), then the system will highlight the node of
foot. (see Fig. 4)
3.3
Presentation of Geometric Textbook Knowledge
For a textbook once constructed, it is necessary to provide a view that presents
the knowledge objects and category objects in readable styles. From the textbook
(or part of one), the system automatically generates corresponding XML docu-
ments by assembling the data of the selected objects and renders them (both in
English and Chinese) via JDesktop Integration Components (JDIC [14]), which
provide Java applications with access to functionalities and facilities furnished
by the native desktop (see Figs. 5, 6). The generated XML documents can easily
be styled and transformed into other document formats (MathDox [17], or PDF,
etc.) by using XSLT.

Fig. 4. The deﬁnition of foot is highlighted when Simson’s theorem is placed before
it.
Fig. 5. Rendering the Section “Simson lines” in English

Fig. 6. Rendering the Section “Simson lines” in Chinese
3.4
Automatic Problem Solving
As presented in Section 2.3, geometric statements of knowledge objects are for-
malized and represented by using customized geometric concepts. However, most
geometry software tools only implement some of them. For communicating with
the available stand-alone packages, it is indispensable to transform these state-
ments into semantically equivalent ones employing the concepts that the target
geometry software packages are able to identify and manipulate. Inspired by
the idea of expression simpliﬁcation in functional programming, we have imple-
mented this transformation automatically by applying deﬁnitions of customized
geometric concepts stored in the knowledge base. The process of communication
with geometry software packages is diagrammed in Fig. 7.
Fig. 7. The workﬂow of communication with geometry software packages

We have implemented communication with GEOTHER for automated theo-
rem proving (see Fig. 8) and with GeoGebra for drawing dynamic ﬁgures auto-
matically (see Fig. 9).
Fig. 8.
Simson’s theorem
in
the
textbook
is
automatically
proved
by
using
GEOTHER.
4
Conclusion and Future Work
This paper describes the design principles and, brieﬂy, the technical realization
of the ﬁrst version of Electronic Geometry Textbook. The system provides an
integrated environment for users to manage and share textbook knowledge ob-
jects, construct dynamic geometry textbooks interactively and eﬃciently, and
publish styled geometric documents easily. The knowledge objects encapsulate
multiple forms of knowledge data for diﬀerent applications, such as presentation
in natural languages, processing by selected external geometry software packages
for automated theorem proving and dynamic ﬁgure drawing, etc. The textbooks
constructed can be manipulated easily with automatic consistency-checking in
real time. The system can be viewed as a geometry-textbook-authoring assistant.
Currently, the development of Electronic Geometry Textbook is still at an
early stage. It is far from its ultimate goal of seeing that the dynamic geometry
textbooks constructed can be used in practice with students. For instance, com-
munications with geometry software packages lack interactions with users. Aside

Fig. 9. The dynamic ﬁgure of Simson’s theorem is automatically drawn by using
GeoGebra.
from a series of experiments on the system in the near future, we are preparing
to explore approaches to the design and development of interactive exercises in
geometry and to enhance the usability of the textbooks.
Acknowledgments. The author wishes to thank Professor Dongming Wang
for his kind supervision and Professor Arjeh M. Cohen for inviting him to visit
and work at the DAM group of Technische Universiteit Eindhoven. His work
has beneﬁted from communication with Hans Cuypers and other members of
the DAM group during his stay in Eindhoven. The author also wishes to thank
the referees for their insightful comments and Patrick Ion for the copy-editing
which have helped bring this paper to its present form. It has been supported by
the Chinese National Key Basic Research (973) Project 2005CB321901/2 and
the SKLSDE Open Fund BUAA-SKLSDE-09KF-01.
