arXiv:2101.02648v2  [cs.AI]  14 Feb 2021
Argument Schemes and Dialogue for Explainable Planning
Quratul-ain Mahesar
Department of Informatics, King’s College London,
London, UK

Simon Parsons
School of Computing Science, University of Lincoln,
Lincoln, UK

ABSTRACT
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) is being increasingly deployed in prac-
tical applications. However, there is a major concern whether AI
systems will be trusted by humans. In order to establish trust in AI
systems, there is a need for users to understand the reasoning be-
hind their solutions. Therefore, systems should be able to explain
and justify their output. In this paper, we propose an argument
scheme-based approach to provide explanations in the domain of
AI planning. We present novel argument schemes to create argu-
ments that explain a plan and its key elements; and a set of crit-
ical questions that allow interaction between the arguments and
enable the user to obtain further information regarding the key
elements of the plan. Furthermore, we present a novel dialogue
system using the argument schemes and critical questions for pro-
viding interactive dialectical explanations.
KEYWORDS
Argument Schemes, Dialogue, Explanation, Planning
1
INTRODUCTION
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) researchers are increasingly concerned
that whether the systems they build will be trusted by humans.
One mechanism for increasing trust is to make AI systems capable
of explaining their reasoning. In this paper we provide a mecha-
nism for explaining the output of an AI planning system. Auto-
mated planning [12] is one of the sub ﬁelds of AI that focuses on
developing techniques to create eﬃcient plans, i.e., sequences of
actions that should be performed in order to achieve a set of goals.
In practical applications, for instance, this set of actions can be
passed to a robot, or a manufacturing system, that can follow the
plan and produce the desired result.
Explainable AI Planning (XAIP) [11] is a ﬁeld that involves ex-
plaining AI planning systems to a user. The main goal of a plan ex-
planation is to help humans understand reasoning behind the plans
produced by the planners. Approaches to this problem include ex-
plaining planner decision-making processes as well as forming ex-
planations from the models. Previous work on model-based expla-
nations of plans include [11, 22].
To provide explanations for plans, we make use of argumenta-
tion. Argumentation [21] is a logical model of reasoning that is
aimed at the evaluation of possible conclusions or claims by consid-
ering reasons for and against them. These reasons, i.e., arguments
and counter-arguments, provide support for and against the con-
clusions or claims, through a combination of dialectical and logi-
cal reasoning. Argumentation is connected to the idea of establish-
ing trust in AI systems by explaining the results and processes of
the computation of a solution or decision, and has been used in
many applications in multi-agent planning [25] and practical rea-
soning [1]. Argumentation has also been used in explanation dia-
logues. A dialogue system [3] for argumentation and explanation
consists of a communication language that deﬁnes the speech acts
and protocols that allow transitions in the dialogue. This allows
the explainee to challenge and interrogate the given explanations
to gain further understanding.
In this paper, we show how to use argumentation to generate
explanations in the domain of AI planning, to answer questions
such as ‘Why a?’, where a is an action in the plan, or ‘How g?’,
where g is a goal. Questions like these are inherently based upon
deﬁnitions held in the domain related to a particular problem and
solution. Furthermore, questions regarding particular state infor-
mation may arise, such as ‘Why a here?’. To answer such ques-
tions, it is necessary to extract relevant information about actions,
states and goals from the planning model. This information allows
us to provide supporting evidence to draw conclusions within the
explanation process. In addition, it allows us to create a summary
explanation of the whole plan and, through dialogue and question-
ing, extract further information regarding the elements of the plan.
Our approach is built around a set of argument schemes [26]
which create arguments that explain and justify a plan and its key
elements (i.e., actions, states and goals). We call such arguments
plan explanation arguments. These schemes are complemented by
critical questions that allow a user to seek further information re-
garding the plan elements, and allow interaction between diﬀer-
ent arguments. Plan explanation arguments can be constructed
through the instantiation of argument schemes, and can be ques-
tioned with a given scheme’s associated critical questions (CQs).
Given a plan explanation argument 퐴instantiating an argument
scheme, CQs are possible counter-arguments to 퐴, and they ques-
tion the premises, i.e., presumptions of 퐴about the key elements
of the plan, and so shift the burden of proof such that further argu-
ments must be put forward to argue for the plan elements in the
premises questioned. Until this burden of proof is met, a plan expla-
nation argument 퐴cannot be said to be justiﬁed. The plan explana-
tion arguments enable a planning system to answer such questions
at diﬀerent levels of granularity. In addition, we present a dialogue
system utilizing the argument schemes and critical questions for
providing an interactive approach for explanation and query an-
swering, and give algorithms that describe the mechanization of
a dialogue conversation between the planner and user in the dia-
logue system. To make our argumentation-based explanations for
the planning study concrete, we use a version of the classic blocks
world.
2
RELATED WORK
Our research is inspired by work in practical reasoning and argu-
mentation for multi-agent planning. However, ourargument scheme

based approach, generates explanations for a plan created by an
AI planner, which we assume to be a single entity. One of the
most well known scheme-based approaches in practical reasoning
is presented in [1], which is accompanied by a set of critical ques-
tions that allow agents to evaluate the outcomes on the basis of
the social values highlighted by the arguments. [14] is an exten-
sion of [1] speciﬁcally designed for multi-agent planning where
agents can discuss the suitability of plans based on an argumenta-
tion scheme and associated critical questions. Furthermore, in [24],
a model for arguments is presented that contributes in delibera-
tive dialogues based on argumentation schemes for arguing about
norms and actions in a multi-agent system. [17] has proposed a
similar scheme-based approach for normative practical reasoning
where arguments are constructed for a sequence of actions.
[20] propose a framework that integrates both the reasoning
and dialectical aspects of argumentation to perform normative prac-
tical reasoning, enabling an agent to act in a normative environ-
ment under conﬂicting goals and norms and generate explanation
for agent behaviour. [2] explore the use of situation calculus as a
language to present arguments about a common plan in a multi-
agent system and [23] present an argumentation-based approach
to deliberation, the process by which two or more agents reach
a consensus on a course of action. [19] propose a formal model
of argumentative dialogues for multi-agent planning, with a focus
on cooperative planning, and [10] present a practical solution for
multi-agent planning based upon an argumentation-based defeasi-
ble planning framework on ambient intelligence applications.
The works that are closest to our research for generating plan
explanations using argumentation are given in [5, 18] and [8]. In [5,
18], a dialectical proof based on the grounded semantics [4] is cre-
ated to justify the actions executed in a plan. More recently, in [8],
an assumption-based argumentation framework (ABA) [7] is used
to model the planning problem and generate explanation using the
related admissible semantic [9]. Our work diﬀers from both, since
we present argument schemes to generate the explanation argu-
ments for all the key elements of the plan, and critical questions
to allow interaction between the arguments. Whilst previous re-
search provides a static explanation, in our approach, a dialogue
system is presented that allows the user to engage in a dialogue
conversation with the AI planner to challenge and interrogate the
planner explanations.
3
ARGUMENTATION MODEL
In this section, we describe plan explanation arguments and their
interactions at the level of abstract argumentation [6], together
with a set of critical questions that are suitable for arguing over
plan explanations as we will later show.
An argumentation framework is simply a set of arguments and a
binary attack relation among them. Given an argumentation frame-
work, argumentation theory allows to identify the sets of argu-
ments that can survive the conﬂicts expressed in the framework.
Deﬁnition 3.1. (Abstract Argumentation Framework [6]): An ab-
stract argumentation framework (AAF) is a pair AAF = (A, R),
where A is a set of arguments and R is an attack relation (R ⊆
A × A). The notation (퐴, 퐵) ∈R where 퐴, 퐵∈A denotes that
argument A attacks argument B.
Dung [6] originally introduced an extension approach to deﬁne
the acceptability of arguments, i.e., semantics for an abstract argu-
mentation framework. An extension is a subset of A that repre-
sents the set of arguments that can be accepted together. For an
AAF = (A, R): (1) A set E ⊆A is said to be conﬂict free if and
only if there are no 퐴, 퐵∈E such that (퐴,퐵) ∈R. (2) A set E ⊆A
is said to be admissible if and only if it is conﬂict free and defends
all its arguments. E defends 퐴if and only if for every argument
퐵∈A, if we have (퐵,퐴) ∈R then there exists 퐶∈E such that
(퐶,퐵) ∈R. (3) A set E ⊆A is a complete extension if and only if
E is an admissible set which contains all the arguments it defends.
(4) A set E ⊆A is a grounded extension if and only if E is a min-
imal (for set inclusion) complete extension. Below, we will show
how to formulate the explanation of a plan (and its key elements)
as an argument in such a way that the argument is only accept-
able if the plan is valid. We then adopt the grounded semantics to
establish acceptability so that the explanation argument will only
be acceptable if none of the objections, established using critical
questions, are supported by the planning model.
4
PLANNING MODEL
In this section, we introduce the planning model that we use. This
is based on an instance of the most widely used planning represen-
tation, PDDL [13].
The main components are:
Deﬁnition 4.1. (Planning Problem) A planning problem is a tu-
ple 푃= ⟨푂, Pr, △퐼, △퐺,퐴, Σ,퐺⟩, where:
(1) 푂is a set of objects;
(2) Pr is a set of predicates;
(3) △퐼⊆Pr is the initial state;
(4) △퐺⊆Pr is the goal state, and 퐺is the set of goals;
(5) 퐴is a ﬁnite, non-empty set of actions;
(6) Σ is the state transition system;
Deﬁnition 4.2. (Predicates) Pr is a set of domain predicates, i.e.,
properties of objects that we are interested in, that can be true or
false. For a state 푠⊆푃푟, 푠+ are predicates considered true, and
푠−= 푃푟\ 푠+. A state 푠satisﬁes predicate 푝푟, denoted as 푠|= 푝푟, if
푝푟∈푠, and satisﬁes predicate ¬푝푟, denoted 푠|= ¬푝푟, if 푝푟∉푠.
Deﬁnition 4.3. (Action) An action 푎= ⟨푝푟푒,푝표푠푡⟩is composed
of sets of predicates 푝푟푒, 푝표푠푡that represent 푎’s pre and post con-
ditions respectively. Given an action 푎= ⟨푝푟푒,푝표푠푡⟩, we write
푝푟푒(푎) and 푝표푠푡(푎) for 푝푟푒and 푝표푠푡. Postconditions are divided
into 푎푑푑(푝표푠푡(푎)+) and 푑푒푙푒푡푒(푝표푠푡(푎)−) postcondition sets. An
action 푎can be executed in state 푠iﬀthe state satisﬁes its precon-
ditions. The postconditions of an action are applied in the state푠at
which the action ends, by adding 푝표푠푡(푎)+ and deleting 푝표푠푡(푎)−.
Deﬁnition 4.4. (State Transition System) The state-transition sys-
tem is denoted by Σ = (푆,퐴,훾), where:
• 푆is the set of states.
• 퐴is a ﬁnite, non-empty set of actions.
• 훾: 푆× 퐴→푆where:
– 훾(푆,푎) →(푆\ 푝표푠푡(푎)−)) ∪푝표푠푡(푎)+, if 푎is applicable in
푆;
– 훾(푆,푎) →undeﬁned otherwise;

Initial State
C
B
A
Goal State
A
C
B
Figure 1: Blocks World Example
– 푆is closed under 훾.
Deﬁnition 4.5. (Goal) A goal achieves a certain state of aﬀairs.
Each 푔∈퐺is a set of predicates 푔= {푟1, ..., 푟푛}, known as goal
requirements (denoted as 푟푖), that should be satisﬁed in the state to
satisfy the goal.
We then deﬁne a plan as follows.
Deﬁnition 4.6. (Plan) A plan 휋is a sequence of actions ⟨푎1, ..., 푎푛⟩.
A plan 휋is a solution to a planning problem푃, i.e., plan 휋is valid iﬀ:
(1) Only the predicates in △퐼hold in the initial state:푆1 = △퐼; (2) the
preconditions of action 푎푖hold at state 푆푖, where 푖= 1, 2, ..., 푛;
(3) 훾(푆, 휋) satisﬁes the set of goals 퐺. (4) the set of goals satisﬁed
by plan 휋is a non-empty 퐺휋≠∅consistent subset of goals.
Finally we deﬁne the state transitions associated with a plan.
Deﬁnition 4.7. (Extended State Transition System) The extended
state transition function for a plan is deﬁned as follows:
• 훾(푆, 휋) →푆if |휋| = 0 (i.e., if 휋is empty);
• 훾(푆, 휋) →훾(훾(푆,푎1), 푎2, ..., 푎푛) if |휋| > 0 and 푎1 is applica-
ble in 푆;
• 훾(푆, 휋) →undeﬁned otherwise.
Each action in the plan can be performed in the state that results
from the application of the previous action in the sequence. After
performing the ﬁnal action, the set of goals 퐺휋will be true. We
present the following Blocks World example to illustrate.
Example 4.8. A classic blocks world consists of the following: A
ﬂat surface such as a tabletop; an adequate set of identical blocks
which are identiﬁed by letters; and the blocks can be stacked one
on one to form towers of unlimited height. We have three pred-
icates to capture the domain: On(X, Y), block 푋is on block 푌;
Ontable(X), block 푋is on the table; and Clear(X), block 푋has
nothing on it. We have two actions, 푎1 and 푎2:
(1) 푎1 : Unstack(X, Y) – pick up clear block 푋from block 푌;
• pre(a1) : {Clear(X), On(X, Y)}
• post(a1)+ : {Ontable(X), Clear(Y)}
• post(a1)−: {On(X, Y)}
(2) 푎2 : Stack(X, Y) – place block 푋onto clear block 푌;
• pre(a2) : {Ontable(X), Clear(X), Clear(Y)}
• post(a2)+ : {On(X, Y)}
• post(a2)−: {Ontable(X), Clear(Y)}
The initial and goal states of the blocks world problem are shown
in Figure 1.
The initial state △퐼is given by
{Ontable(C), On(B, C), On(A, B), Clear(A)}
and the goal state △퐺is given by
{On(C, A), Ontable(A), Ontable(B), Clear(C), Clear(B)}
The action sequence: ⟨Unstack(A, B), Unstack(B, C), Stack(C, A)⟩is
a valid plan.
□
5
ARGUMENT SCHEMES FOR EXPLAINING
PLANS
In scheme-based approaches [26] arguments are expressed in natu-
ral language and a set of critical questions is associated with each
scheme, identifying how the scheme can be attacked. Below, we
introduce a set of argument schemes for explaining a plan and its
key elements, i.e., action, state and goal. The set of critical ques-
tions allow a user to ask for a summary explanation for the plan
and consequently interrogate the elements of the plan by question-
ing the premises of the arguments put forward by the planner. The
explanation arguments constructed using the argument schemes
allow the planner to answer any user questions.
Deﬁnition 5.1. Given a planning problem 푃:
• HoldPrecondition(pre(a), S) denotes that the precondition푝푟푒(푎)
of action 푎holds at the state 푆.
• HoldGoal(g, S) denote that the goal 푔holds at the state 푆.
• HoldGoals(G, △G) denotes that all the goals in the set of
goals 퐺hold at the goal state △퐺.
• ExecuteAction(a, S) denotes that action 푎is executed at state
푆.
• AchieveGoal(a, g) denotes that action 푎achieves goal 푔.
• AchieveGoals(휋, G) denotes that sequence of actions휋achieves
the set of goals 퐺.
• Solution(휋, P) denotes that 휋is a solution to the planning
problem 푃.
Deﬁnition 5.2. (Action Argument Scheme Arg푎) An action argu-
ment Arg푎explains how it is possible to execute an action 푎:
• Premise 1: HoldPrecondition(pre(a), S1). In the current state
푆1, the pre-condition 푝푟푒(푎) of action 푎holds.
• Conclusion: ExecuteAction(a, S1). Therefore, we can exe-
cute action 푎in the current state 푆1.
Example 5.3. We consider the blocks world of Example 4.8. The
explanation argument for the ﬁrst action Unstack(A, B) is shown
as follows. Where:
• 푝푟푒(Unstack(A, B)) = {Clear(A), On(A, B)}.
• 푆1 = {Ontable(C), On(B, C), On(A, B), Clear(A)}.
Premise 1:
HoldPrecondition(pre(Unstack(A,B)), S1)
In the current state {Ontable(C), On(B, C), On(A, B), Clear(A)}, the
pre-condition {Clear(A), On(A, B)} of action Unstack(A, B) holds.
Conclusion:
ExcecuteAction(Unstack(A, B), S1)
Therefore, we can execute action Unstack(A, B) in the current state
{Ontable(C), On(B, C), On(A, B), Clear(A)}.
□

Deﬁnition 5.4. (State Argument Scheme Arg푆)1 A state argument
Arg푆explains how the state 푆becomes true:
• Premise 1:훾(푆1, 푎) →((푆1 \푝표푠푡(푎)−)) ∪푝표푠푡(푎)+ = 푆). In
the current state 푆1, we can execute the action 푎∈휋, after
which the negative postconditions 푝표푠푡(푎)−do not hold and
the positive postconditions 푝표푠푡(푎)+ hold, that results in the
state 푆.
• Conclusion: Therefore, the state 푆is true.
Example 5.5. The state argument Arg푆for the state푆= {On(B, C),
Clear(A), Clear(B), Ontable(A), Ontable(C)} in the Example 4.8 is
shown as follows. Where:
• 푎= Unstack(A, B).
• 푝표푠푡(푎)−= {On(A, B)}
• 푝표푠푡(푎)+ = {Ontable(A), Clear(B)}
• 푆1 = {Ontable(C), On(B, C), On(A, B), Clear(A)}.
Premise 1:
훾(푆1, Unstack(A, B)) →((푆1 \ 푝표푠푡(푎)−)) ∪푝표푠푡(푎)+ = 푆).
In the current state {Ontable(C), On(B, C), On(A, B), Clear(A)}, we
can execute the action Unstack(A, B), after which the negative post-
conditions {On(A, B)} do not hold and the positive postconditions
{Ontable(A), Clear(B)} hold, that results in the state {On(B, C),
Clear(A), Clear(B), Ontable(A), Ontable(C)}.
Conclusion:
Therefore, the state {On(B, C), Clear(A), Clear(B), Ontable(A),
Ontable(C)} is true.
□
Deﬁnition 5.6. (Goal Argument Scheme Arg푔) A goal argument
Arg푔explains how a goal is achieved by an action in the plan:
• Premise 1: 훾(푆1,푎) →푆2. In the current state 푆1, we can
execute the action 푎∈휋, that results in the next state 푆2.
• Premise 2: HoldGoal(g, S2). In the next state 푆2, the goal 푔
holds.
• Conclusion: AchieveGoal(a, g): Therefore, the action푎achi-
eves the goal 푔.
Example 5.7. The goal argument Arg푔for the goal푔= Ontable(A)
in the Example 4.8 is shown as follows. Where:
• 푎= Unstack(A, B).
• 푆1 = {Ontable(C), On(B, C), On(A, B), Clear(A)}.
• 푆2 = {Ontable(C), On(B, C), Clear(A), Clear(B), Ontable(A)}.
Premise 1:
훾(푆1, Unstack(A, B)) →푆2
In the current state {Ontable(C), On(B, C), On(A, B), Clear(A)}, we
can execute the action Unstack(A, B), that results in the next state
{Ontable(C), On(B, C), Clear(A), Clear(B), Ontable(A)}.
Premise 2:
HoldGoal(Ontable(A), 푆2).
In the next state {Ontable(C), On(B, C), Clear(A), Clear(B),
Ontable(A)}, the goal Ontable(A) holds.
Conclusion:
AchieveGoal(Unstack(A, B), Ontable(A)):
Therefore, the action Unstack(A, B) achieves the goal Ontable(A).
□
1This does not apply to the initial state △퐼and we assume that the user knows the
initial state is true by default.
Deﬁnition 5.8. (Plan Summary Argument Scheme Arg휋) A plan
summary argument Arg휋explains that a proposed sequence of ac-
tions 휋= ⟨푎1,푎2, ..., 푎푛⟩is a solution to the planning problem 푃
because it achieves a set of goals 퐺:
• Premise 1: 훾(푆1, 푎1) →푆2, 훾(푆2, 푎2) →푆3,...,훾(푆푛, 푎푛) →
푆푛+1. In the initial state 푆1 = △퐼, we can execute the ﬁrst
action 푎1 in the sequence of actions 휋that results in the
next state 푆2 and execute the next action 푎2 in the sequence
in the state 푆2 that results in the next state 푆3 and carry on
until the last action 푎푛in the sequence is executed in the
state 푆푛that results in the goal state 푆푛+1 = △퐺.
• Premise 2: HoldGoals(G, △G). In the goal state △퐺, all the
goals in the set of goals 퐺hold.
• Premise 3: AchieveGoals(휋, G). The sequence of actions 휋
achieves the set of all goals 퐺.
• Conclusion: Solution(휋, P). Therefore, 휋is a solution to the
planning problem 푃.
Example 5.9. The plan summary argument Arg휋for the solution
plan given in the Example 4.8 is shown as follows. Where:
• 푆1 = △퐼= {Ontable(C), On(B, C), On(A, B), Clear(A)}
• 푆2 = {On(B, C), Clear(A), Clear(B), Ontable(A), Ontable(C)}
• 푆3 = {Clear(A), Clear(B), Clear(C), Ontable(A), Ontable(B),
Ontable(C)}
• 푆4 = △퐺= {On(C, A), Ontable(A), Ontable(B), Clear(C),
Clear(B)}
• 퐺= {On(C, A), Ontable(A), Ontable(B), Clear(C), Clear(B)}
• 휋= ⟨Unstack(A, B), Unstack(B, C), Stack(C, A)⟩
Premise 1:
훾(푆1, Unstack(A, B)) →푆2
In the initial state {Ontable(C), On(B, C), On(A, B), Clear(A)}, we
can execute the action Unstack(A, B) that results in the next state
{On(B, C), Clear(A), Clear(B), Ontable(A), Ontable(C)}.
훾(푆2, Unstack(B, C)) →푆3
In the state {On(B, C), Clear(A), Clear(B), Ontable(A), Ontable(C)},
we can execute the action Unstack(B, C) that results in the next
state {Clear(A), Clear(B), Clear(C), Ontable(A), Ontable(B),
Ontable(C)}.
훾(푆3, Stack(C, A)) →푆4
In the state {Clear(A), Clear(B), Clear(C), Ontable(A), Ontable(B),
푂푛푡푎푏푙푒(퐶)}, we can execute the action Stack(C, A) that results in
the goal state {On(C, A), Ontable(A), Ontable(B), Clear(C),
Clear(B)}.
Premise 2:
HoldGoals(△퐺, 퐺)
In the goal state {On(C, A), Ontable(A), Ontable(B), Clear(C),
Clear(B)}, all the goals in the set of goals {On(C, A), Ontable(A),
Ontable(B), Clear(C), Clear(B)} hold.
Premise 3:
AchieveGoals(휋, 퐺)
The sequence of actions ⟨Unstack(A, B), Unstack(B, C), Stack(C, A)⟩
achieves the set of all goals {On(C, A), Ontable(A), Ontable(B),
Clear(C), Clear(B)}.
Conclusion:
Solution(휋, P)

Therefore, ⟨Unstack(A, B), Unstack(B, C), Stack(C, A)⟩is a solution
to the planning problem 푃.
□
Having described the schemes and shown how they are used, we
turn to the critical questions (CQs). The four CQs given below de-
scribe the ways in which the arguments built using the argument
schemes can interact with each other. These CQs are associated to
(i.e., attack) one or more premises of the arguments constructed us-
ing the argument schemes and are in turn answered (i.e., attacked)
by the other arguments, which are listed in the description.
CQ1: Is it possible for the plan 휋to be a solution? This CQ
begins the dialogue with the user, and it is the ﬁrst question that
the user asks when presented with a solution plan 휋. The argu-
ment scheme Arg휋answers the CQ by constructing the summary
argument for the plan 휋.
CQ2: Is it possible to execute the action 푎? This CQ is associ-
ated with the following argument schemes: Arg휋, Arg푆, Arg푔. The
argument scheme Arg푎answers the CQ by constructing the expla-
nation argument for the action 푎.
CQ3: Is it possible to have the state 푆? This CQ is associated
with the following argument schemes: Arg휋, Arg푎, Arg푔. The argu-
ment scheme Arg푆answers the CQ by constructing the explana-
tion argument for the state 푆.
CQ4: Is it possible to achieve the goal 푔? This CQ is associated
with the argument scheme Arg휋. The argument scheme Arg푔an-
swers the CQ by constructing the explanation argument for the
goal 푔.
We organise the arguments and their interactions by mapping
them into a Dung abstract argumentation framework [6] denoted
by AAF = (A, R), where A is a set of arguments and R is an at-
tack relation (R ⊆A×A). Args ⊂A and CQs ⊂A, where Args =
{Arg휋, Arg푎, Arg푆, Arg푔} and CQs = {CQ1, CQ2, CQ3, CQ4}. Given
the way that the plan explanation arguments were constructed,
they will be acceptable under the grounded semantics if the plan is
valid. We present the properties of the plan explanation arguments
as follows.
Property 5.1. For a valid plan 휋, the set of arguments Args is com-
plete, in that, if a CQ ∈CQs exists, then it will be answered (i.e.,
attacked) by an Arg ∈Args.
Proof. Since, (Arg휋,퐶푄1) ∈R, (Arg푎,퐶푄2) ∈R, (Arg푆,퐶푄3) ∈
R, and (Arg푔,퐶푄4) ∈R, therefore, a unique Arg ∈Args exists, that
attacks a unique CQ ∈CQs. Thus, Args is complete.
□
In other words, if the plan is valid, then all the objections that
can be put forward regarding the plan and its elements do not hold.
In particular:
Property 5.2. For a valid plan 휋, Arg휋∈Gr iﬀ퐶푄∉Gr when
(CQ, Arg휋) ∈R, 퐶푄∈퐶푄푠.
Proof. Follows from Property 5.1. Since any CQ that attacks
Arg휋is in turn attacked by an Arg ∈Args, therefore, 퐶푄∉Gr.
Thus, Arg휋∈Gr.
□
In a very similar way we can show the following:
Property 5.3. For a valid plan 휋, Arg휋∈Gr iﬀ∀푔∈퐺Arg푔∈Gr.
Property 5.4. For a valid plan 휋, Arg휋∈Gr iﬀ∀푎∈퐴Arg푎∈Gr.
Property 5.5. For a valid plan 휋, Arg휋∈Gr iﬀ∀푆푖∈푆Arg푆푖∈Gr.
In other words, all the objections of the user regarding: the set of
goals 퐺; the actions 퐴; and states 푆(where ∃푆푖∈푆held at each
action step) that are related to the plan 휋, do not hold.
Property 5.6. For a plan 휋, Arg휋∈Gr iﬀplan 휋is valid. 2
In other words, all the objections regarding the plan 휋and its
elements do not hold. Therefore, plan 휋is valid.
Property 5.7. For a plan 휋′, Arg휋′ ∉Gr iﬀplan 휋′ is invalid. 3
Collectively these properties align the notion of a valid plan
with an acceptable plan explanation argument. If we assume, as we
do going forward, that a user is rational in the sense of 1) accept-
ing the arguments in the grounded extension of a Dung framework,
and 2) only holding to true those facts in the planning model, then
if a plan is valid, that user will accept that the plan explanation
argument holds. It is in that sense that we consider the argument
to be a suitable explanation — it can justify all the plan elements
by providing arguments that are grounded in the planning model.
6
DIALOGUE SYSTEM USING ARGUMENT
SCHEMES AND CRITICAL QUESTIONS
In this section, we present a system for a formal dialogue between
planner and user that allows the user to explore the plan explana-
tion arguments, raising objections and having them answered. It
provides an interactive process that recursively unpacks the expla-
nation arguments and allows the user to assure themselves of their
acceptability (and hence the validity of the plan).
The dialogue takes place between two participants: (1) planner;
and (2) user . The communication language consists of the legal di-
alogue moves by the two participants. The moves that the planner
and user can use in a dialogue are deﬁned as follows.
Deﬁnition 6.1. (Planner Moves) Planner moves consist of the fol-
lowing: (1) Arg휋, plan summary argument. (2) Arga, action argu-
ment. (3) ArgS, state argument. (4) Argg, goal argument.
Deﬁnition 6.2. (User Moves) User moves consist of the follow-
ing: (1) CQ1, is it possible for the plan 휋to be a solution? (2) CQ2,
is it possible to execute the action 푎? (3) CQ3, is it possible to have
the state 푆? (4) CQ4, is it possible to achieve the goal 푔?
A joint commitment store is used for holding the planner and
user moves (i.e., arguments) used within a dialogue.
Deﬁnition 6.3. (Commitment Store) A commitmentstore denoted
by CS ⊆(Args ∪CQs) holds all the arguments (i.e., planner moves
and user moves) which the planner and user are dialectically com-
mitted to. CS(pl) denotes all the arguments of the planner and
CS(us) denotes all the arguments of the user.
To ensure that the dialogue conversation ends, we deﬁne the
termination conditions for the dialogue as follows.
Deﬁnition 6.4. (Termination conditions) The dialogue terminates
when any one of the following three conditions holds:
• 푇1 : PlannerMove = 푛푢푙푙. When the planner is unable to
generate the argument, because one of the premises of the
argument is not true.
2Follows immediately from properties 5.1–5.5.
3Follows immediately from properties 5.1–5.5.

• 푇2 : UserMove = 푛푢푙푙. When the user has exhaustively asked
all CQs regarding the components of the plan.
• 푇3 : UserMove = 푛표푛푒. When the user does not want to ask
any more questions.
Termination of the dialogue conversation results in an outcome.
Deﬁnition 6.5. (Dialogue Outcomes) There are three possible
outcomes of the dialogue:
• 푂1 =“Plan is invalid and explanation is unacceptable".
• 푂2 = “Plan is valid and explanation is acceptable".
• 푂3 = “Explanation is acceptable".
The user and planner both have to follow rules.
Deﬁnition 6.6. (User Move Rules) The moves that are allowed
for the user to put forward depend on the previous moves of the
planner 4. The allowed user moves in response to the planner moves
are given below, where the ﬁrst move does not require any previ-
ous planner moves. (1) CQ1 5 (2) Arga: CQ3 (3) ArgS: CQ2 (4) Argg:
CQ2, CQ3 (5) Arg휋: CQ2, CQ3, CQ4
Deﬁnition 6.7. (Planner Move Rules) The moves that are allowed
for the planner to put forward depend on the previous move by the
user. The allowed planner moves in response to the user moves
are given below. (1) CQ1: Arg휋(2) CQ2: Arga (3) CQ3: ArgS (4) CQ4:
Argg
The dialogue has to follow certain rules (i.e., a protocol).
Deﬁnition 6.8. (Dialogue Rules) Following are the rules of the di-
alogue denoted by DR: (1) The ﬁrst move in the dialogue is made by
the user, which is, CQ1. (2) Both players, i.e., planner and user can
put forward a single move at a given step in response to each other.
(3) Once the move is put forward, it is stored in the commitment
store CS. (4) The user cannot put forward a move, i.e., argument
already present in the commitment store CS for a plan component
and the same goes for the planner. 6 (5) Each user move has to fol-
low the user move rules given in Deﬁnition 6.6. (6) Each planner
move has to follow the planner move rules given in Deﬁnition 6.7.
(7) The dialogue ends when any one of the termination conditions
푇1, 푇2, or 푇3 holds.
The dialogue between the planner and user is then deﬁned.
Deﬁnition 6.9. (Dialogue) We deﬁne a dialogue to be a sequence
of moves D = [푀0, 푀1, ..., 푀푛]. The dialogue takes place between
the two participants, i.e., planner and user. Each dialogue partici-
pant must follow the dialogue rules DR for making moves. Each
move put forward by both participants is recorded and stored in
the commitment store CS. The dialogue terminates when any one
of the termination conditions 푇1,푇2, or 푇3 holds. Based on the ter-
mination condition 푇, the outcome of the dialogue can be:
• If 푇= 푇1, then outcome of the dialogue is:
푂1 =“Plan is invalid and explanation is unacceptable".
4User can select any one of the previous moves put forward by the planner.
5We assume that planner has already presented the plan 휋to the user and do not
consider this a move.
6Since a previously asked user CQ for a plan component is not allowed, therefore, we
assume that the planner will not repeat the same argument.
• If 푇= 푇2, then outcome of the dialogue is:
푂2 = “Plan is valid and explanation is acceptable".
• If 푇= 푇3, then outcome of the dialogue is:
푂3 = “Explanation is acceptable".
In order to describe the dialectical process, we introduce Algo-
rithms 1–4. Algorithm 4 presents an operational description of the
dialogue D in the dialogue system speciﬁed above, that allows the
planner and user to ﬁnd moves, i.e., arguments to put forward in a
dialogue, based on the counterarguments put forward by the other
party. The dialogue starts when the planner presents a plan 휋to
the user and the user asks the ﬁrst 퐶푄1. During the dialogue con-
versation, the planner is either able to construct an appropriate
argument via the argument schemes; or the argument returned is
null, indicating that it is unable to construct the argument, i.e., 푇1
holds, which consequently terminates the dialogue. Similarly, the
user either has the option of asking a critical question regarding
the premises of any one argument from the previous arguments
put forward by the planner; or the user has no more questions to
ask, i.e.,푇3 holds, which consequently terminates the dialogue. Fur-
thermore, the user may exhaustively ask all the critical questions
(and the planner successfully answers them), i.e.,푇2 holds, and thus,
the dialogue terminates. The dialogue ﬁnishes with one of the three
possible outcomes 푂1, 푂2, or 푂3.
Algorithm 1–2 provide an operational description of ways that
a rational user may behave. We can think of these as both a mecha-
nism for proving that the dialogue works as desired, and as a mech-
anism for generating allowable moves in an implementation that
walks the user through an exploration of the plan. In Algorithm 1,
the user is able to choose a previous planner argument in the di-
alogue and ﬁnd all the allowed moves that she can put forward
in response to that. The input of Algorithm 1 is the set of all pre-
vious planner moves, i.e., arguments generated via the argument
schemes and the output is a set of user moves consisting of argu-
ments, i.e., CQs, from which the user can further choose a single
CQ. In Algorithm 2, the user can select a particular move from the
set of user moves or choose not to ask any more questions. Thus,
the output of Algorithm 2 is either the chosen CQ or none. In Al-
gorithm 3, the planner can ﬁnd the relevant move (i.e., argument
generated via the argument schemes) to answer the user CQ. The
input of Algorithm 3 is the previous user move, i.e., CQ and the
output is an appropriate planner move corresponding to the user
CQ. If the planner is unable to generate the argument via the ar-
gument schemes, then we assume the output planner move to be
null.
6.1
Properties of the Dialogue
A dialogue D generated in the dialogue system has the following
properties. In these results, ArgsD denotes all the moves, i.e., argu-
ments used by the planner in a dialogue D, where ArgsD ⊆Args.
CQsD denotes all the moves, i.e., CQs used by the user in a dialogue
D, where CQsD ⊆퐶푄푠.
The ﬁrst four properties align the validity of a plan with the
successful defence of the explanation argument.

Algorithm 1 Find User Moves
Require: ArgsP, set of previous arguments put forward by plan-
ner
Ensure: UserMoves, set of all allowed user moves
1: function FindUserMoves(ArgsP)
2:
if ArgsP ≠∅then
3:
Arg ←user chooses Arg s.t. Arg ∈ArgsP
4:
if Arg = Arga then
⊲if 퐴푟푔is the action argument
5:
UserMoves ←{CQ3}
6:
else if Arg = ArgS then ⊲if 퐴푟푔is the state argument
7:
UserMoves ←{CQ2}
8:
else if Arg = Argg then ⊲if 퐴푟푔is the goal argument
9:
UserMoves ←{CQ2, CQ3}
10:
else if Arg = Arg휋then ⊲if 퐴푟푔is the plan summary
argument
11:
UserMoves ←{CQ2, CQ3, CQ4}
12:
end if
13:
else
⊲if the plan 휋is presented to the user
14:
UserMoves ←{CQ1}
15:
end if
16:
return UserMoves
17: end function
Algorithm 2 Select User Move
Require: UserMoves, set of all allowed user moves
Require: CQsU , set of previous arguments put forward by user
Ensure: UserMove, a selected user move
1: function SelectUserMove(UserMoves, CQsU )
2:
if (User wants to question further) && (UserMoves ⊈
CQsU ) then
3:
UserMove
←
user
chooses
푢
푠.푡.
푢
∈
UserMoves && 푢∉CQsU
4:
else
⊲User does not have any more questions
5:
UserMove ←none
6:
end if
7:
return UserMove
8: end function
Algorithm 3 Find Planner Move
Require: UserMove, critical question put forward by user
Ensure: PlannerMove, allowed planner move
1: function FindPlannerMoves(UserMove)
2:
if UserMove = CQ1 then
3:
PlannerMove ←Arg휋
4:
else if UserMove = CQ2 then
5:
PlannerMove ←Arga
6:
else if UserMove = CQ3 then
7:
PlannerMove ←ArgS
8:
else if UserMove = CQ4 then
9:
PlannerMove ←Argg
10:
end if
11:
return PlannerMove
12: end function
Algorithm 4 Dialogue
Require: 퐶푄푠, set of all critical questions for plan 휋
Ensure: outcome, outcome of the dialogue
1: function Dialogue(퐶푄푠)
2:
PlannerMove ←푛푢푙푙, UserMoves ←∅
3:
UserMove ←푛푢푙푙, CS ←∅
4:
do
5:
if CS(us) ≠CQs then
⊲User has not exhaustively
asked all CQs.
6:
UserMoves ←FindUserMoves(CS(pl))
7:
UserMove ←SelectUserMove(UserMoves, CS(us))
8:
if UserMove ≠none then
9:
CS ←CS ∪{UserMove}
10:
PlannerMove ←FindPlannerMove(UserMove)
11:
if PlannerMove ≠푛푢푙푙then
12:
CS ←CS ∪{PlannerMove}
13:
end if
14:
end if
15:
else
⊲User has exhaustively asked all CQs.
16:
UserMove ←null
17:
end if
18:
while ((UserMove
≠
null) or (UserMove
≠
none) or
(PlannerMove ≠null))
19:
if PlannerMove = null then
20:
outcome ←“Plan is invalid and explanation is unac-
ceptable."
21:
else if UserMove = null then
22:
outcome ←“Plan is valid and explanation is accept-
able."
23:
else if UserMove = none then
24:
outcome ←“Explanation is acceptable."
25:
end if
26:
return outcome
27: end function
Property 6.1. For a given dialogue D, plan 휋is valid and its ex-
planation is acceptable iﬀthe planner has exhaustively answered
all CQs regarding the plan and its elements, i.e., CQsD = 퐶푄푠. 7
Property 6.2. For a given dialogue D, plan 휋’s explanation is ac-
ceptable iﬀthe planner has answered all CQs of the user and the
user does have any more CQs to ask. 8
Property 6.3. For a given dialogue D, plan 휋′ is invalid and its
explanation is unacceptable to the user iﬀthe planner is unable to
answer, i.e., generate an appropriate argument via the argument
schemes for at least one CQ ∈CQsD. 9
Property 6.4. A dialogue D for a valid plan 휋results in an expla-
nation that is acceptable. 10
Next we consider termination of the dialogue.
Property 6.5. A dialogue D for a plan 휋always terminates.
7Follows from property 5.1.
8Follows from property 6.1.
9Follows from property 5.7.
10Follows from property 5.6.

Proof. The three termination conditions 푇1,푇2, and 푇3 ensure
that the dialogue 퐷always terminates. We prove this by consid-
ering all three conditions: (1) 푇1: This arises when the planner is
unable to construct an appropriate argument in response to a user
question. Whenever this happens the dialogue D terminates. (2)푇2:
This arises when the user has asked all possible CQs and the plan-
ner has successfully answered them. Whenever this happens the
dialogue D terminates, and the user is not able to put forward any
more questions. (3) 푇3: This arises when the user has no further
questions to ask. Whenever this happens the dialogue D termi-
nates.
For a valid plan 휋, since 푇2 condition ensures that the dialogue
terminates when the user has exhaustively asked all CQs regarding
the elements of the plan (worst-case), and the dialogue rules 퐷푅
ensure that the user cannot ask the same CQ (for the same plan
element) again, therefore, the dialogue D for a valid plan 휋always
terminates.
For an invalid plan 휋′, since 푇1 condition will always arise be-
fore 푇2 which we have already proved above will always termi-
nate, therefore, the dialogue D for an invalid plan 휋′ always ter-
minates.
□
Next we show that there is a sense in which the dialogue is
sound and complete with respect to the arguments that are ex-
pressed.
Property 6.6. A dialogue D for a valid plan 휋is complete, in that,
the planner has an argument for each element of the plan and the
user has a CQ for each element of the plan. Furthermore, if a user
has a CQ ∈CQsD then the planner has a corresponding argument
Arg ∈ArgsD to respond with.
Proof. Follows from property 5.6. Lines 2-15 of Algorithm 1
help the user in ﬁnding a CQ for each plan element corresponding
to the planner argument (or the plan). Similarly, Lines 2-10 of Al-
gorithm 3 help the planner in ﬁnding an argument for each plan
element (or plan summary) corresponding to a user CQ.
□
Property 6.7. A dialogue D for a valid plan 휋is sound, in that,
∀CQ ∈CQsD, each user move CQ is correct. Similarly, ∀Arg ∈
ArgsD, each planner move Arg is correct.
Proof. Both participants of the dialogue D, i.e., planner and
user must follow the dialogue rules 퐷푅. This ensure that each of
them always picks a move that is legally allowed, i.e., correct at
every single step in the dialogue D. Since, Algorithm 1 ﬁnds the
set of all allowed user moves following the dialogue rules 퐷푅as
given in Lines 2-15, therefore ∀CQ ∈CQsD, each user move CQ is
correct. Similarly, Algorithm 3 ﬁnds a planner move following the
dialogue rules 퐷푅as given in Lines 2-10, therefore ∀Arg ∈ArgsD,
each planner move Arg is correct.
□
6.2
Example
The following is a dialogue generated by the dialogue system given
the blocks world of Example 4.8.
1) The planner presents a plan 휋, i.e., sequence of actions, 휋=
⟨Unstack(A, B), Unstack(B, C), Stack(C, A)⟩to the user.
2) Algorithm 1 is called by the user to ﬁnd a set of possible
moves, and then, Algorithm 2 is called by the user to select
Arga
CQ2
Arg휋
CQ1
Figure 2: Argumentation graph of the example dialogue
a particular move (or end the dialogue if the user has no
questions). Since 휋is not an argument, it is assumed that
the planner has presented the plan 휋. The user asks,
CQ1: Is it possible for the plan 휋to be a solution?
3) Algorithm 3 is called by the planner to ﬁnd a suitable move,
i.e., Arg휋which is the plan summary argument. Planner
presents the argument Arg휋, which is given in Example 5.9. 11
4) Algorithm 1 is called by the user which returns a set of CQs,
{퐶푄2,퐶푄3,퐶푄4}, and after that, Algorithm 2 is called by the
user to select one of the CQs or end the dialogue. The user
asks,
CQ2: Is it possible to execute the action
푎= UNSTACK(A, B)?
5) Algorithm 3 is called by the planner to ﬁnd a suitable move,
i.e., Arg푎, which is the action argument for action
푎= UNSTACK(A, B), as given in Example 5.3. 12
6) Algorithm 1 is called by the user, where the user chooses
the previous planner argument Arg푎to question 13, which
returns a set of CQs, {퐶푄3}. After that, Algorithm 2 is called
by the user to select a CQ or terminate the dialogue. The
user decides to terminate the dialogue, and thus, ﬁnds the
explanation acceptable.
Figure 2 presents the argumentation graph of the above dia-
logue, where the grounded extension Gr = {Arga, Arg휋}. The out-
come of the dialogue is “Explanation is acceptable", since the
user has no further questions to ask and the plan 휋has not yet
proven to be invalid. On the other hand, if at any point the plan-
ner is unable to construct a suitable argument then the explanation
will be considered as unacceptable and this would imply the plan
is invalid. Furthermore, if the user has exhaustively asked all CQs
and the planner has successfully answered them, then the explana-
tion will be considered acceptable and the plan valid.
7
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We have presented a novel argument scheme-based approach for
generating interactive explanations in the domain of AI planning.
The novelty of our approach compared to previous research is:
(1) we have presented novel argument schemes to generate the
arguments that directly provide an explanation; (2) we have used
the concept of critical questions to allow interaction between the
arguments; (3) we have presented a novel dialogue system using
the argument schemes and critical questions to provide dialectical
interaction between the planner and user; and (4) our approach
helps in determining the validity of the plans and whether the ex-
planation is acceptable to a rational user. Note that, our approach
to generating explanation arguments is planner independent and
11Arg휋is not repeated here and can be seen in Example 5.9.
12Arg푎is not repeated here and can be seen in Example 5.3.
13At this point the user can choose any previous planner argument including the plan
summary argument Arg휋to question further.

therefore, can work on a wide range of input plans in classical plan-
ning, and in the future, we intend to extend this to richer planning
formalisms such as partial order and temporal planning.
In the future, we aim to develop algorithms based on the ar-
gument schemes to automatically extract the arguments from the
input planning model. Furthermore, we aim to extend the argu-
ments schemes and CQs to generate contrastive explanations [15],
and to explore dialogue strategies [14] for ﬁnding good moves in
a dialogue, for instance, to facilitate the user to ﬁnd relevant infor-
mation about the plan with a minimum number of moves. Another
avenue of future research is to model user trust [16] during a di-
alogue conversation and determine how the user trust ratings of
the planner explanation arguments should aﬀect the outcome of
the dialogue.
