Price Trackers Inspired by Immune Memory 
 
 
William O. Wilson*, Phil Birkin* and Uwe Aickelin* 

 
*School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, UK 
 
 
 
Abstract. In this  paper  we outline  initial  concepts  for an  immune  in- 
spired  algorithm  to evaluate price  time  series  data.  The  proposed  solu- 
tion evolves a short term pool of trackers dynamically through a process 
of proliferation and  mutation,  with  each  member   attempting to map 
to trends in price  movements.  Successful  trackers  feed into  a long term 
memory pool that can generalise  across  repeating trend patterns. Tests 
are performed to examine  the algorithm’s ability to successfully identify 
trends in a small  data set. The  influence  of the long term memory  pool 
is then examined. We find the algorithm is able to identify price trends 
presented successfully  and  efficiently. 
 
 
1 Introduction 
 
The  investigation of time series data for analysis  and  prediction of future  in- 
formation is a popular  and well studied area of research.  Historically statistical 
techniques  have been applied  to this  problem  domain,  however in recent  years 
the use of evolutionary techniques has seen significant growth in this area. Neural 
networks [6] [13], genetic programming [7], and genetic algorithms [3] are all ex- 
amples of methods  that have been recently applied to time series evaluation and 
prediction. 
However the use of immune inspired (IS) techniques in this field has remained 
fairly limited [9]. IS algorithms have been used with success in other fields such 
as pattern recognition [2], optimisation [5], and data mining [8]. In this paper we 
propose an IS approach,  using trackers  to identify trends in time series data, and 
take advantage of the associative learning  properties exhibited by the natural 
immune system. 
The time series proposed for investigation in this paper is that of price move- 
ments (Section  2)  and  the approach  used  to identify trends in  price  data is 
inspired  by the immune memory theory of Dr Eric Bell [1]. His theory indicates 
the existence of two separately identifiable memory  populations which are ide- 
ally suited to recognise long and short term trends prevalent in time series data. 
In  Section  3 we discuss  this immune  memory  theory and  introduce other im- 
mune mechanisms  which form part of our algorithm. The algorithm itself is then 
presented  in Section  4. The  methodology  for testing  the algorithm,  the results 
and discussions of the results are documented in Sections 5, 6 and 7 respectively, 
before concluding  in Section 8. 

 
 
 
2 Analysis and representation  of price trends 
 
In our approach  price data is converted to price movements over time and  pre- 
sented to the system as an antigen. The change in price at time ti is calculated as 
the closing price at time ti less that of ti−1 . Price movements are then banded to 
simplify classification. For example a price rise between $0 and $1 is categorised 
as a $1 price rise and  stored as the antigen Ag = [1]. The classification bound- 
ary  (in this  case 1) can be altered  as required  depending  on the level of detail 
needed  in the evaluation. Price  movements are then stored in chronological  or- 
der within a vector  representing the antigen. The  antigen  provides  a historical 
record of price changes over a particular period. The objective  of our algorithm 
is to identify the trends prevalent within that antigen. 
A trend ‘T’ is defined  as  a  sequence  of continuous price  changes,  whose 
length  exceeds  one,  that are  seen to repeat  at least  once within  the antigen. 
This  paper  provides  a proof of concept  that such a trend detection mechanism 
is possible. 
 
 
3 Development  of long  and short  term memory 
 
The  flexible learning  approach  offered by  the immune  system  is attractive as 
an inspiration but  without an adequate memory  mechanism  knowledge gained 
from  the learning  process  would  be  lost. Memory  therefore represents a  key 
factor in the success of the immune system. A difficulty arises in implementing an 
immune memory mechanism however, because very little is still known about  the 
biological mechanisms  underpinning memory development [11]. Theories such as 
antigen persistence and long lived memory cells [10], idiotypic networks  [4], and 
homeostatic turnover of memory  cells [12]  have  all  attempted to explain  the 
development and maintenance of immune memory  but  all have been contested. 
The attraction of the immune memory  theory proposed  by Dr Eric Bell is that 
it provides  a simple, clear and logical explanation of memory  cell development. 
This  theory highlights the evolution  of two separate memory  pools,  ‘memory 
primed’ and ‘memory revertant’ [1], see Figure  1. 
Antigen  presented  by  dendritic  cells in the lymph  node causes  naive  cells 
to undergo  blast transformation and  become activated, increasing  proliferative 
capacity, and responsiveness but becoming short lived in the process due to their 
instability. This  rapidly  expanding  population forms  the short lived memory 
primed pool. The purpose of this growing pool is to drive the affinity maturation 
process to cope with the huge diversity in the potential antigen repertoire. These 
cells migrate  to the periphery  in an attempt to interact with  further  antigens. 
If antigen contact is achieved  the memory  primed  cells terminally differentiate 
into effector cells to counter the antigen, after which point they die. 
The high rate of apoptosis  of memory primed  cells means most will die dur- 
ing circulation of the periphery,  however a small  minority that fail to achieve 
secondary  antigen  exposure  do survive  and  return to the lymph  node to reach 
a memory  revertant state. These  cells down-regulate  cytokine  production and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Immune  memory  development [1] 
 
 
apoptotic  pathways  and  revert  back  to a  naive  like state. The  key difference 
to naive  cells however is that these revertant cells are  able to homeostatically 
turnover,  producing  clones to sustain  knowledge of an antigen  experience  over 
the long term. These  two distinct memory  pools, and  the transfer mechanism 
between  them,  represent  a key difference to other  memory  theories,  and  prove 
the inspiration for memory  development in our algorithm. 
In our  solution  the equivalent of the short term memory  pool is generated 
using a derivative of the popular  clonal selection algorithm [5] which proliferates 
all successfully bound  candidates. The short term memory pool evolves through 
a special form of mutation, and is regulated through apoptosis.  Successful candi- 
dates from the short term memory pool then transfer to the long term memory 
pool for permanent storage. This pool can then be utilised during future  antigen 
presentations to aid in identification. These  mechanisms  are discussed in detail 
in Section 4. 
 
 
4 
An  immune inspired trend evaluation  and prediction 
solution 
 
The pseudo code for the proposed Trend  Evaluation Algorithm (TEA)  is detailed 
in Program 1. Each  of the significant  operations  in the TEA  is then described 
in the subsequent sections.  All parameters noted in these sections  have  been 
chosen using educated guesses based on previous experience, no formal sensitivity 
analysis  has been performed  to date but  will form part of our future  work. 
 
 
4.1 Tracker pool construction  and initialisation 
 
The  TEA  comprises  a population of individual  ‘trackers’ whose purpose  is to 
identify the price  trends located within an  antigen. Each  tracker is a  vector 
consisting of multiple price change  estimates, much like the antigen. The  price 
estimates  are  generated  using  a Gaussian  distribution  and  converted  to price 

 
 
 
 
Program 1 . TEA  Pseudo  Code 
 
Convert oil  price data to form  antigen  ‘Ag’ 
Generate naive tracker  pool ‘TP’ 
For  generations 1  to N 
{ 
Present Ag to each   tracker ‘Ti’ 
Calculate affinity  ‘AF’  between Ag and  Ti 
Identify  optimal match  sequence  ‘MS’in   Ti 
Calculate stimulation  factor  ‘SF’ of  MS 
Calculate  match  length ‘ML’ of  MS 
If (AF < bind threshold)  &&   (SF  or  ML   > previous SF,  ML   values) 
{ 
Clone   Tracker in proportion to ML 
Determine mutation  mechanism  &   mutate clone 
Add clones to TP 
} 
Identify  long term   (LT)  memory candidates  from  TP 
Transfer successful candidates to LT  memory pool 
Apoptose TP 
} 
 
 
 
categories. The  initial tracker pool is set at 20 trackers and  the length of each 
tracker is randomly  generated on initialisation to contain between one and four 
price estimates. 
 
 
4.2 Antigen presentation and tracker binding 
 
The  algorithm runs  for 50 generations. During  each generation the latest price 
change  value  is calculated and  provided  to the TEA  and  added  to the current 
antigen.  In generation  ‘n’ the TEA  will obtain  the nth  price change  value  and 
present  it, along  with  all  previous  price  values,  as  an  antigen  to the  current 
tracker  population. 
The  affinity between  the antigen and  each tracker is calculating as the nu- 
merical  difference between  the price  values  in the antigen  and  the tracker.  A 
bind threshold of zero produces  a continuous set, or sub-set,  of the tracker that 
identically matches a part of, or the whole of, the antigen. All possible contin- 
uous  permutations of the tracker are  assessed  against the antigen to find the 
longest matching sequence  ‘MS’ between  the two entities. For  example,  given 
antigen A1 [0.5, 1, 2] and  tracker T1 [1, 2, 1], the MS would be [1,2] after all 
permutations of T1 and A1 were investigated. 
During  the binding  process the stimulation factor  ‘SF’ for the current MS is 
determined. This corresponds to the number of times MS is seen to repeat within 
the antigen. The match length ‘ML’ of the tracker is calculated as the length of 
MS. If SF and ML both exceed 1 then the MS represents a recurring  trend within 
the antigen and that tracker is flagged as a candidate for proliferation. To avoid 

 
 
 
 
excessive population growth, proliferation candidates only undergo proliferation 
if their SF or ML values exceed those attained in the previous  generation. The 
tracker is seen to have improved its fitness to an antigen trend (in terms of length 
of match, or frequency of occurrence)  and as such is cloned. 
 
 
4.3 Proliferation and Mutation 
 
All trackers that meet the proliferation criteria are cloned, forming the short term 
memory  pool theorised in Section  3. The  number  of clones generated during  a 
match is proportional to the ML for that match. This  was decided  because  a 
proliferation mechanism,  using ML as a driver, in conjunction  with the mutation 
mechanism,  encourages successful trackers to evolve and lengthen to match ever 
longer trends. 
Clones undergo mutation within the TEA in one of two unique forms, selected 
randomly  with a probability of 0.5. 
 
–  Mutation by Extension : Here a new price estimate is generated randomly 
using a Gaussian  distribution and added  to the end of the clone. 
–  Mutation by Shortening : Here a randomly  selected price estimate within 
the tracker is eliminated. 
 
Extension  mutation  allows the clone, whose parent  was a successful match 
to a trend, to anticipate  the next  price  movement  in that trend. The  tracker 
clone evolves to increase  the length  of it’s  MS as it  tries  to detect  longer  and 
more complex price trends. During the binding process some trackers will contain 
redundant price information. Redundant price information is defined as any price 
values  within the tracker that are not included  in the MS of that tracker. The 
shortening mutation permits the trackers a random  chance to rid themselves of 
redundant information and improve the accuracy  of the resulting memory pool. 
 
 
4.4 Long term memory transfer 
 
During  each generation all trackers undergoing  proliferation become candidates 
for entry into the long term memory pool. Trackers  that have a MS not recorded 
in the memory  pool will automatically be transferred into the pool for preser- 
vation.  Candidates  with  a MS identical  to that of one of the memory  trackers 
will only replace  that memory  if they contain  less redundant information  than 
that memory tracker. The memory pool thus reflects the most efficient matching 
trackers in the population up to that point in time. 
 
 
4.5 Apoptosis 
 
To  ensure  the tracker population returns to a  stable equilibrium  10% of the 
current tracker population is selected at random  and eliminated. Both high and 
low affinity trackers have the same probability of death. If the population falls 

 
 
 
 
below its minimal  limit of 20 the remaining  population will automatically clone 
to repopulate the pool, reflecting homeostatic turnover observed in nature. 
To  reflect  the instability and  high  death rate prevalent in  the short term 
memory  pool clones are eliminated  five generations  after  their  creation  if they 
do not improve  on  their affinity to an  antigen trend. This  ensures  excessive 
population  growth  is carefully  regulated  and  a  return to a  stable  population 
level soon after antigen presentation ceases. 
Reviewing  the mechanisms  within the TEA  one can  see a close similarity 
exists to algorithms such as CLONALG  [5], however a number  of notable dif- 
ferences exist. Compared  to CLONALG  apoptosis  occurs across all population 
members  in the TEA,  not just the lowest affinity members.  In addition, due to 
it’s  specialised  nature, mutation  in the TEA  is not directly  related  to affinity 
fit. TEA  also proliferates  all  bound  trackers  to form  the short  term  memory 
pool, encouraging  diversity in the search  space.  The  process  in CLONALG  is 
more elitist, as only the ‘n’ fittest population members are proliferated and mu- 
tated, and  from these only the best fitting clone becomes a memory  candidate. 
All remaining  clones are eliminated. In essence CLONALG  skips the short term 
memory pool stage as it looks to find the best fitting candidate using the mini- 
mum of resources. In comparison  the TEA maintains the population of clones in 
order to match and anticipate patterns arising in the data fed live to the system. 
 
 
5 Testing  Methodology 
 
5.1 Methodology 
 
In order to test the ability of the TEA to identify trends in a data series, a simple 
antigen ‘A’ was constructed. ‘A’ contains 20 fictitious price movements, and  8 
trends, T1 to T8. These represent the complete set of trends in A in accordance 
with the definition described  in Section 2. The antigen and trends T1 to T8 are 
listed in Table  1. 
 
 
Table 1. Antigen data sets with observed  trends. 
 
Antigen Price Movements
A
[ 1, 2, 1, -0.5, 1, 2, 1, 0.5, -0.5, 0.5, 2, 1, 2, -0.5, 2, 1, 2, -0.5, 1, 1.5 ]
A1
[ 1, 2, 1, -0.5, 1, 2, 1, 0.5, -0.5, 0.5 ]
A2
[ 2, 1, 2, -0.5, 2, 1, 2, -0.5, 1, 1.5 ]
Trends
T1
[ 1, 2 ] - seen in A, A1 and A2
T2
[ 1, 2, 1 ] - seen in A and A1
T3
[ 2, 1 ] - seen in A, A1 and A2
T4
[ 1, 2, -0.5 ] - seen in A and A2
T5
[ 2, -0.5 ] - seen in A and A2
T6
[ 2, 1, 2 ] - seen in A and A2
T7
[ 2, 1, 2, -0.5 ] - seen in A and A2
T8
[ -0.5, 1 ] - seen in A

 
 
 
 
To assess the ability of the TEA  to associate new novel antigen with those 
experienced  during  past presentations we split antigen A at the mid point into 
two subsets  A1 and  A2, both of length 10. A1 represents the training data set 
from which the TEA will develop a long term memory of trends associated with 
A1. A2 represents the testing data set which the TEA  will have to examine  in 
the light of information preserved  from the experience of A1. 
A1 contains  three  simple trends,  T1,  T2 and  T3.  They  are closely related, 
in terms of the price  movements they contain, so presenting A1 to the TEA 
represents a simple challenge to ensure the TEA  operates correctly. 
A2’s purpose  is to test the ability of the TEA  to handle  a more  complex 
antigen with more  diverse  trends. A2 comprises  6 trends, T1  and  T3  as were 
noted in A1, in addition to four new trends T4 to T7. Compared  to A1 we have 
increased  the number  of trends from three to six and increased  their length and 
diversity, making  it more difficult for the TEA  to find all the trends in A2. 
It is hypothesized that although trends T4, T5, T6 and T7 are more complex 
to identify from knowledge of A2 alone, after experiencing trends T1, T2, and T3 
from A1’s presentation, which are related to T4 to T7, the TEA  should develop 
some form of association between the trends leading to an easier recognition of 
these new patterns. To test this hypothesis we define the following 4 experiments. 
In  experiment 1 the training set  A1  will be  presented to the TEA  from 
generations 1 to 10. The  testing set  A2 is then presented to the TEA  from 
generations 30 to 40. The  TEA  is run  for 50 generations and  the experiment 
repeated and  results averaged  across  10 runs.  The  frequency  of detection of 
trends T1  to T7  is recorded  across  all  runs.  To  give a  base  line  comparison 
where there is no memory in the system experiment 1 assumes no knowledge of 
A1 is carried forward in the TEA during A2’s presentation. At the point of A2’s 
presentation the tracker population is replaced by the random tracker population 
created in generation 0. The  TEA  therefore has to learn  to recognise trends in 
A2 from scratch. 
Experiment  2 investigates  the impact  of incorporating  feedback  from  the 
long term memory  pool into the TEA.  We repeat the previous  experiment, but 
the tracker  population  at generation  30 is repopulated  using  clones from  the 
long term memory pool. We identify whether  any association properties become 
apparent  in the TEA  by  examining  the frequency  with  which  the trackers  in 
the long  term memory  pool  have  detected the trends in  A2 as  compared  to 
experiment 1. 
Experiment  3 investigates  the issue of scalability  in the TEA.  Experiments 
1 and 2 present antigen sub sets of only 10 data items at a time. We now scale 
up the information presented to evaluate the impact  on the TEA’s performance. 
Experiment 3 presents the complete antigen A to the TEA from generation 1 to 
20, doubling the size of the information presented. Results in terms of population 
sizes, trend detection rates and memory pool efficiency are then to be compared 
with experiments 1 and 2. 
Experiment 4 compares the performance of the TEA against a random search. 
Each  tracker generated during  execution  represents a potential search solution; 

 
 
 
 
given the high population levels anticipated in the TEA  one could argue that a 
large randomly  generated  tracker  population  would also succeed in identifying 
the trends prevalent in an antigen. Experiment 4 generates a random  population 
of trackers, whose size is approximately equivalent to the population levels gen- 
erated during experiments 2 and 3 to examine whether  the TEA performs better 
than a random  search in terms of trend detection rates and memory  efficiency. 
 
 
5.2 Performance  evaluation 
 
The results of the TEA  are evaluated as an average  across 10 runs.  The perfor- 
mance of the algorithm is assessed using two measures  i) the number  of trends 
identified  against  the maximum  available  for detection and  ii) the efficiency of 
the trackers  in  the long  term  memory  pool  to map  to the trends.  Efficiency 
can be measured  as the number  of price change values included  in the memory 
tracker that are not contained within the match sequence ‘MS’. For example  if 
the trend to be found  was [2.0, 2.5] and  the best  fitting  tracker  was [2.0, 2.5, 
3.0] the price  value  3.0 within  the tracker  is redundant  given the MS of [2.0, 
2.5]. The degree of efficiency, or to be more precise inefficiency, would therefore 
be calculated as 1 over 3, or 33%. The TEA  was written in C++ and  run  on a 
windows machine  with a Pentium M 1.7 Ghz processor with 1.0 Gb of RAM. 
 
 
6 Results 
 
The  results  of experiments  1 to 3 are  discussed  in the following sections  and 
are  listed in Table  2 whilst those of experiment 4 are  found  in Table  3. TEA 
execution  times  varied  from approximately  40 to 50 seconds for experiments  1 
and 2, and 7 to 8 minutes  for experiment 3. 
 
 
Table 2. Detection rate and  memory  efficiency results. 
 
Experiment
Trend Detection Frequency
Total Detection Rate
T1 T2 T3 T4 T5 T6 T7 T8
1
10 10 10
6
2
1
0 n/a
39
55.7%
2
9
9 10
9
9
7
3 n/a
56
80.0%
3
10 10 10 10
9 10
8
10
77
96.3%
 
Experiment
Redundant memory values
Total Inefficiency Rate
T1 T2 T3 T4 T5 T6 T7 T8
1
0
2
0
0
0
1
0 n/a
3
3.2%
2
0
0
0
0
0
2
1 n/a
3
2.1%
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
3
4
2.0%

 
 
 
 
6.1 Experiment  1. No  Long term memory pool interaction 
 
In accordance  with Section 5 A1 was presented to the TEA  from generations 1 
to 10. The  tracker population at generation 30 was replaced  by the randomly 
generated tracker population from  generation 1. A2 was then presented from 
generations 30 to 40. Figure 2 illustrates the total tracker population in response 
to these presentations, whilst Figure  3 shows the population of trackers that 
specifically match trends T1 to T7. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2. Total Tracker and total matching tracker populations with no memory feedback 
 
 
Regarding  the presentation of A1, Table  2 shows the TEA  is able to identify 
and develop memory trackers that map with 100% success to trends T1, T2 and 
T3 for each of the 10 runs.  There  are no redundant price values in the memory 
pool resulting in 100% memory efficiency. However the TEA  is less successful in 
indentifying trends T4 to T7 from the subsequent presentation of A2. 
The  secondary  response  in Figure  2 is minimal  because  no memory  of the 
trends from A1 are carried  forward  in the system, resulting in the TEA  having 
to relearn  the trends presented. This led to a poor mapping  to A2’s trends due 
to their increased  number  and complexity. 
Trends  T1 and  T2 were again  recognised  within  A2 and  the new trend T4 
was identified with 60% success across the 10 runs, however the remaining  trends 
(T5, T6 and T7) were only rarely detected. In total 39 (55.7%) of the 70 possible 
trends were found across the 10 runs,  with 3.2% memory  inefficiency. 
 
 
6.2 Experiment  2. Long term memory pool interaction 
 
In this experiment the tracker population is replaced with clones from the mem- 
ory pool in generation 30. This  provides  the potential to learn  from the trends 
memorised  in response  to A1, to create  associations  with  the novel trends  in 
A2. Table  2 shows feedback from the memory  pool has a significant impact  on 
the performance  of the TEA  compared  to experiment  1. The  total number  of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. Trackers matching trends T1 to T7 with no memory  feedback 
 
 
 
trends now mapped  by memory trackers increases by 43.6% to 56 trends, giving 
a detection rate of 80% compared  to the previous  coverage of 55.7%. The TEA 
is now able to consistently detect  trends T4, T5, and  T6 and  even manages  to 
identify the elusive T7 with a 30% success rate. Memory inefficiency fell to 2.1% 
with 3 redundant price values included  in the memory  population. 
It should be noted however that due to apoptosis  during run 4 of the experi- 
ment a number  of important trackers were eliminated before they had a chance 
to bind. This resulted in the TEA  failing to detect  6 of the 7 available  trends in 
this run. Omitting this unusual occurrence from our analysis would have boosted 
the current 80% detection rate to 87%. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4. Total Tracker and  total matching tracker populations with memory feedback 
 
 
 
Figures  4 and 5 show the total tracker population levels and tracker popula- 
tions that match the specific trends T1 to T7. Figure 4 shows a more pronounced 
secondary response to A2 compared  to that in Figure 2, with the maximum  pop- 

 
 
 
 
ulation rising to 191 trackers compared  to that of 44 in experiment 1. Looking at 
the population of trackers that map to specific trends (Figure  5) we see evidence 
of stronger responses  to the trends in A2, as seen in Figure  3. Thus  knowledge 
of the trends seen from A1’s presentation have improved the TEA’s recognition 
of new, novel trends that have some association with those previously seen. This 
leads to the 43.6% improvement in trend detection. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5. Trackers matching trends T1 to T7 with memory  feedback 
 
 
This experiment was repeated to examine the impact  of removing the short- 
ening  mutation  function  from  the TEA.  Considering  presentation  of A1  the 
tracker population levels reached  a slightly higher peak of 218 compared  to 191 
with no shortening, however the impact  on the quality of the memory pool was 
significant. Whilst the TEA’s detection rate for trends T1 and T2 varied insignif- 
icantly, without shortening the detection rate for T3 fell from 100% to 10%, T3 
was undetected in 9 of the 10 execution  runs. Of more concern was the fact that 
the resulting memory pool contained 33 redundant price values compared  to the 
100% memory efficiency found through using mutation by shortening. It is clear 
that the shortening mutation is vital for the proper  performance  of the TEA. 
 
 
6.3 Experiment  3. Antigen scalability 
 
To  assess scalability  antigen  A was presented  to the TEA  from generations  1 
to 20. Scanning  A we see a new trend T8 becomes apparent when we combine 
subsets  A1 and A2. Detection  of this trend would not be possible in any of the 
previous  experiments because  its occurrence  in A1 and  A2 does not satisfy the 
definition of a trend in those individual  sub sets.  This  highlights an issue with 
the approach  as the point of split in the antigen has an impact  on the potential 
number  of trends to be detected in the sub parts of that antigen, this issue is 
addressed  later. 
The  tracker  population  reaches  a maximum  of 2,244 trackers  compared  to 
the maximum  population  in experiment  2 of 323. The  memory  pool created  is 

 
 
 
 
able to successfully map to 77 of the 80 possible trends across the 10 runs (96.3% 
coverage).  The  TEA  failed to find T7 twice and  T5 once. Memory  inefficiency 
dropped  to 2% as 4 excess price values were noted in the memory  pool. 
 
6.4 Experiment  4. Comparison with random search 
From experiments 2 and  3 approximately 1,000 and  4,000 trackers respectively 
were generated by the TEA  in order to generate the memory  pool of solutions. 
To compare  the results of experiments 2 and 3 with a random  search, a random 
population was generated consisting of 1,000, 4,000, 10,000 and 20,000 trackers. 
Given  the longest trend (T7)  has  four  price  values,  and  can  be found  by  the 
TEA with no data redundancy, each random  tracker had a randomly  determined 
length between one and four. The randomly  generated population would then be 
mapped to antigen A, and the memory trackers compared to those of experiments 
2 and 3 to see whether  the TEA can outperform a purely random  search. Results 
are  shown in Table  3, ticks  indicate  the trend was found,  crosses indicate  the 
trend was not detected. 
 
 
Table  3. Trends detected using a random search. 
 
Pop Size
Analysis of Trends Detected
Total
T1 T2 T3 T4 T5 T6 T7 T8
1,000
✓
X
✓X
✓X
X n/a
3
4,000
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓X
X
✓
6
10,000
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
X
✓
7
20,000
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
X
✓
7
 
 
With  a randomly  generated  population  of size 1,000 only 3 of the 7 trends 
T1 to T7 were detected. The random  search failed to find trends T2, T4, T6 and 
T7.  In comparison,  during  experiment 2 the TEA  found  6 trends consistently, 
missing only T7 70% of the time. The  detection rate of the TEA  is twice that 
of the random  search with just 1,000 trackers. 
With 4,000 random  trackers 6 of the 8 trends are found,  trends T6 and  T7 
were undetected by the random  search. Increasing the random  population size to 
10,000 trackers, 7 of the 8 trends are detected as T6 is now found. The random 
search fails to find T7, even if we increase the tracker population to 20,000. This 
contrasts to experiment 3 where the TEA, with only 4,000 trackers, can generate 
a memory pool that detects  T1, T2, T3, T4, T6 and T8 every time across all 10 
runs,  and  T5 and  T7 9 and  8 times out  of 10 respectively.  The  TEA  therefore 
outperforms a random  search. 
 
7 Discussion 
 
From experiment 1 it is seen that the TEA  can evolve a population of trackers 
that generate a memory pool able to successfully map to trends in a simple data 

 
 
 
 
set (such as A1) with 100% accuracy  and efficiency. Increasing  the number  and 
complexity of the trends to be found, as was achieved through the presentation 
of A2, causes the algorithm to struggle to identify these potential trends. 
 
Without knowledge of the trends from A1 being carried  forward  in the sys- 
tem, detection rates of the TEA  to the more complex trends falls significantly. 
This  can  be corrected  in the TEA  by increasing  the degree of proliferation  to 
raise the detection rate in the system. But what is of interest to us in this paper 
is whether  the TEA  can  learn,  through  feedback  from  its  long term  memory 
pool,  to associate  what  it  has  memorised  from previous  experiences  to aid  in 
the investigation of new novel antigen. Comparing  the results of experiments 1 
and  2 we see incorporation of the memory  pool has  a beneficial  effect on the 
ability of the TEA  to map to and  memorise trends in a more complex antigen. 
Compared  to its naive counterpart the inclusion of the long term memory  pool 
boosts  trend recognition  from 55.7% to a potential  87.%, whilst  inefficiency in 
the memory  pool is kept  consistently low at 2.1%. 
 
The  reason  for this  improvement  can  be seen if we view the trends  within 
the antigen subsets  A1 and  A2, as shown in Table  1. Trends  T1,  T2  and  T3, 
located within A1, have price change  combinations involving  rises of $1 or $2. 
Recognition and  development of memory  trackers associated with these trends 
would assist  the TEA  in identifying  trends  T4,  T6  and  T7  in A2 as they  too 
have price combinations that involve price rises of $1 and $2. If memory trackers 
can  be successfully evolved to map  to these  trends  during  presentation  of A1, 
as was shown in experiment 2, then the TEA  can  utilise  that knowledge  and 
associate new novel trends with those already  seen, instigating a more successful 
response. Without the ability to associate new experiences with past knowledge 
the performance  of the TEA  declines significantly, as expected. 
 
Although the antigen investigated here is very small and simplistic, it is im- 
portant for the TEA to scale to handle larger antigens. Experiment 3 gives us an 
indication of the scalability of the system as antigen sizes increase.  Comparing 
test experiments  2 and  3 we see increasing  the antigen  size by 100% from 10 
to 20 causes the maximum  tracker population to increase  from 323 trackers to 
2,244, leading to an exponetial  growth problem.  Splitting antigen A into it’s two 
component parts, as done in experiment 3, results in significantly lower popula- 
tion sizes whilst still maintaining a high detection rate. This  is only possible if 
we carry  forward  the long term memory  pool and  feed it back into the tracker 
population to assist in future  antigen recognitions. In this way we can avoid the 
scalability issue whilst maintaining a high degree of accuracy  in the TEA. 
 
However, from test 3 it was evident that separating antigen A at the mid point 
results in trend T8 now not being recognised as a trend within the component 
parts A1 and A2. T8 exists within A1 and A2 but is not repeatedly stimulated so 
has a SF of 1, therefore it does not conform to the definition of a trend in either 
A1 or A2. To avoid this issue the algorithm could be re-run with alternative split 
points to generate an  overall  memory  pool; this will be investigated in future 
work. From analysis in experiment 4 we can also conclude that the TEA performs 

 
 
 
 
significantly better than a random  search  in identifying trends prevailing  in a 
small data set. 
 
8 Conclusion 
 
This paper  presents an immune inspired  algorithm that is successful in identify- 
ing trends in a small simple data set. The authors theorise that these techniques 
can be expanded  and  applied  to larger  time  series data sets to identify  trends 
over  time.  Potential  scalability  issues  can  be addressed  by  breaking  the data 
into more manageable  subsets,  so long as memory generated from previous pre- 
sentations is fed back into the TEA  prior  to new data presentation. Using this 
approach  the algorithm can learn  through association from past experiences  to 
maintain a high success rate in detecting and recording  prevalent trends.
