Missing Value Chain in Generative AI Governance
China as an example
Yulu Pi
Centre for Interdisciplinary Methodologies
University of Warwick

Abstract
We examined the world’s ﬁrst regulation on Generative AI, China’s Provisional
Administrative Measures of Generative Artiﬁcial Intelligence Services, which
came into eﬀect in August 2023. Our assessment reveals that the Measures,
while recognizing the technical advances of generative AI and seeking to govern
its full life cycle, presents unclear distinctions regarding diﬀerent roles in the
value chain of Generative AI including upstream foundation model providers and
downstream deployers. The lack of distinction and clear legal status between
diﬀerent players in the AI value chain can have profound consequences. It can
lead to ambiguity in accountability, potentially undermining the governance and
overall success of AI services.
1
Introduction
After the launch of ChatGPT, there has been a notable surge in public, regulatory, and academic
discussions surrounding Generative Artiﬁcial Intelligence (Generative AI). This rapidly advancing
branch of AI specializes in producing open-ended content, ranging from generating text [15]
and code [8], to crafting vivid images [12] and videos [16], and even orchestrating melodies [7].
The value chain of Generative AI is layered [11]: it begins with foundation models like OpenAI’s
GPT-4, which can generate human-like text. These foundation models can then be ﬁne-tuned
and adapted for more speciﬁc applications, such as Duolingo Max [1] for language learning and
Khan Academy’s Khanmigo [19] for AI-assisted tutoring.
On April 11 Chinese regulators issued draft Measures to govern Generative AI service provisions
in China. After seeking public feedback, the Cyberspace Administration of China (CAC) together
with six other authorities ﬁnalized and announced The Provisional Administrative Measures of
Generative Artiﬁcial Intelligence Services (生⇣✏∫Âz˝服°°⌃ÇLû’, Generative AI
Measures) with a total of 24 articles, on 13 July 2023, which are slated to become eﬀective from
15 August 2023 [13]. It is the world’s ﬁrst eﬀective regulation on Generative AI.
Through our analysis, we found that Generative AI Measures reﬂects the technical developments
of generative AI, trying to provide a holistic governance framework that spans the entire life cycle
of Generative AI. However, it provides an ambiguous diﬀerentiation between the various actors
in the generative AI value chain, falling short in assigning appropriate responsibilities related to
"algorithm design, the selection of training data, model generation and optimization, and the
provision of services1" to the corresponding entities.
1The Generative AI Measures, Article 4,(2)
Workshop on Regulatable Machine Learning at the 37th Conference on Neural Information Processing

2
The Chinese Governance approach for Generative AI
The Generative AI Measures is predominantly designed for Generative AI services to the general
public in China for the generation of texts, images, audio, videos, or other content. Consequently,
any organization or individual utilizing generative AI technology to render such services, whether
it’s through online platforms or programmable interfaces, is subjected to this governance framework.
Notably, sectors like scientiﬁc research and industrial applications, initially considered in the draft
measures [14], have been exempted from the ﬁnal regulations, underscoring China’s dedication
to promoting AI research and innovation. The Generative AI Measures strives to provide a
holistic governance approach which covers the design and development process of the Generative
AI services, algorithmic ﬁlling, criteria for content generation, the post-market monitoring and
oversight. We have identiﬁed 6 emerging themes from the Generative AI measures, these include:
Data governance, Model governance, Algorithmic Filling, Content Governance, User
Protection Governance as well as Departments in Charge.
Since the training data has a direct impact on the generated outcomes, it naturally becomes
a subject of regulation and is accompanied by compliance requirements. The Generative AI
Measures emphasizes the lawful sources of training data and mandates eﬀective measures to
increase the truthfulness, accuracy, objectivity, and diversity. Article 8 speciﬁcally lays out
requirements for the data annotation.
Notably, the mandates concerning data governance
were changed from obligatory requirements in the draft Measures to guidelines in the ﬁnalized
Generative AI Measures. This shift not only underscores the signiﬁcance of data governance of
generative AI but also reduces immediate compliance burdens on enterprises, aligning with the
current state of industrial practice.
Figure 1: 6 emerging themes from the Generative AI measures
The Generative AI Measures introduces the notion of "foundation models" for the ﬁrst time.
This reﬂects the value chain of Generative AI, ranging from "foundation models" to "ﬁne-tuned
models" and then "service applications". Article 7 mandates the use of foundation models from
legitimate sources. The safety assessment obligations and record-ﬁling procedures with China’s
cyberspace agency required by Article 17 might provide a legal basis for determining legitimate
sources. For instance, foundation models included in the deep synthesis service algorithm records
[3] can be considered to have a legitimate source. For instance, following a ﬁling application
and approval by the Chinese government, Ernie Bot, Baidu’s generative AI chatbot, is now
fully accessible to the public in September 2023 [5]. Under Article 20, the CAC and relevant
departments have the authority to direct extraterritorial generative AI service providers operating
within China to adopt technical or other essential adjustments if they aren’t adhering to Chinese
laws. Although this suggests that those abiding by the law can still oﬀer their generative AI
2

services in China, currently, no foreign entities are active in this vast market. Moreover, the
legitimacy of models trained outside of China, like the widely-used open-source model LLaMA,
remains to be further clariﬁed.
Article 14 integrates content governance with model governance, emphasizing that AI oversight
needs to adapt to the continuously evolving nature of Generative AI. It states that providers must
take immediate action upon identifying illegal content. This involves stopping its generation and
dissemination, removing the content, undertaking corrective actions to improve the models, and
promptly notifying the appropriate authorities. In addition to prohibiting illegal and discriminatory
content, Article 12 mandates that providers must label AI-generated content. This ensures that
users are aware they are engaging with content generated by AI, thereby enabling rational ﬁltering
and value judgment of the relevant content. The regulatory scope of the Generative AI Measures
falls on the Generative AI services provided to the Chinese public, emphasizing the services’
public-facing components. Numerous provisions speciﬁcally aim to protect user rights, requiring
Generative AI service providers to uphold cybersecurity obligations as online information content
producers. Moreover, as personal information handlers, these service providers need to comply
with personal information protection obligations. These stipulations mandate the signing of a
user agreement (Article 9), implementing measures to deter excessive dependence or addiction
to the service (Article 10)„ limiting acquisition to users’ personal data and records (Article 11),
ensuring a stable and secure service (Article 13), and setting up a system for complaints (Article
15).
The Generative AI Measures has inherited the power of algorithm service inspection from the
Provisions on the Administration of Algorithm-generated Recommendations for Internet Infor-
mation Services (íTQ·o服°ó’®P°⌃ƒö) and Administrative Provisions on Deep
Synthesis in Internet-based Information Services (íTQ·o服°Ò¶合⇣°⌃ƒö). Based
on provisions like algorithmic ﬁling and algorithm safety assessment, the Generative AI Measures
establishes a mechanism for algorithm disclosure. Article 19 stipulates that providers must fulﬁll
additional algorithm disclosure duties to the regulatory authorities. Relevant departments can
require Generative AI service providers to supply necessary information that might aﬀect user trust
and choices. These details include ’sources, models, types, tagging rules, algorithm mechanisms’.
Should any service contravene Chinese statutes, protocols, or the clauses of the articles, the CAC
holds the authority to halt or revoke the online privileges of such foreign Generative AI service
providers within China’s jurisdiction.
3
The Missing Value Chain
On January 10, 2023, China’s Administrative Provisions on Deep Synthesis in Internet-based
Information Services (Deep Synthesis Provisions) entered into eﬀect [3]. Within these provisions,
distinctions were made between deep synthesis service (DSS) providers and DSS technical
supporters. This distinction mirrors the legislative understanding of the Generative AI value chain,
recognizing that the creation of foundational models and their integration into products and
services can be handled by diﬀerent entities. It represents a positive step towards governing AI
products according to their distinctive characteristics. Notably, leading experts have underscored
that "Many AI products are not produced by a single organisation, but involve a complex web
of procurement, outsourcing, re-use of data from a variety of sources" [9]. However, this clear
understanding of the AI value chain seems to have disappeared in the subsequent Generative AI
Measures.
While the Generative AI Measures introduced the notion of "foundation models" for the ﬁrst
time, in line with special considerations for these models as noted in other legislative eﬀorts,
it neglects the diﬀerence between technical supporters and service providers. The general use
of the term "providers" obscured the distinct roles of players within the generative AI value
chain, spanning from "foundation model" to "ﬁne-tuned model" and ﬁnally, "service application."
This can also lead to conceptual discrepancies within the Generative AI Measures. For instance,
companies that adopt OpenAI’s API to integrate ChatGPT into their applications which oﬀer
services to the public, are classiﬁed as Generative AI service providers and are governed by the
Generative AI Measures. According to Article 4, these companies are required to take eﬀective
measures during the algorithm design, training data selection, model development, optimization,
and service provision processes to prevent discrimination. However, these companies may ﬁnd it
3

challenging to comply with this stipulation, as they lack access to both the training data and the
design choices behind the adopted model.
The European Commission’s proposed Draft AI Act from April 2021 did not directly address
foundation models. This Act is based on the ’New Legislative Framework’ which adopts a
standard product safety perspective [4]. However, since its introduction, there has been growing
criticism that the AI Act might be too static for practical use [2]. The Act adopted a risk-based
approach, with prohibitions on systems with unacceptable risk, stringent mandatory regulation
of high-risk systems, and minimal management of AI systems with limited risk. Any company
identiﬁed as providing high-risk AI systems must comply with strict rules on data management,
information provision and transparency, risk management, and human oversight. On the other
hand, "low-risk" AI systems are only subject to meet minimal transparency commitments. Such
a risk-based approach has been criticized for disregarding the complexity of use intention in
determining the risk level. For instance, an image recognition algorithm might initially qualify as
low-risk under the regulation. However, if it is later employed for facial recognition, the stringent
responsibilities associated with high-risk AI would apply. This becomes more apparent in the case
of foundation models, which can be adapted for a variety of uses. As it stands, the Act places
the obligation on downstream deployers who adapt or ﬁne-tune existing foundation models into
speciﬁc use contexts. Consequently, the deployers would bear the more onerous duties and full
responsibility for risks arising from external data and design decisions made during the foundation
model’s design stage, typically undertaken by large corporations.
In response to these criticisms as well as the rapidly evolving landscape of Generative AI, the
Compromise Amendments have taken into account the complexity of the value chain for Generative
AI systems, clarifying the legal situation of providers of foundation models as well as downstream
deployers. It acknowledges that foundation models hold growing importance to many downstream
applications and systems as they can be repurposed in countless downstream tasks. In the
added Article 28, it outlined a total of nine obligations for providers of foundation models, with
three being particularly noteworthy [2]. Firstly, risk identiﬁcation is paramount. While upstream
providers of a foundation model might ﬁnd it challenging to foresee all its potential use cases
and address its risks, they are nevertheless already aware of certain risks, like biases and lack
of representation in the training dataset. Article 28 b(2a) would make it mandatory to identify
and mitigate reasonably foreseeable risks throughout development with appropriate methods
such as with the involvement of independent experts, as well as the documentation of remaining
non-mitigable risks after development. Secondly, the emphasis on testing and evaluation is
vital. It ensures providers commit to adequate testing and evaluation to make design decisions
that achieve appropriate levels of performance, predictability, interpretability, corrigibility, safety,
and cybersecurity. Lastly, the providers of the foundation models also bear extremely extensive
documentation obligations. This facilitates downstream providers in meeting their obligations as
providers of high-risk AI systems. While the EU’s approach to regulating Generative AI has been
applauded as a step in the right direction, some critics argued that the associated compliance
costs might be so high that only large companies can aﬀord them. This could potentially stiﬂe
competition and hinder innovation [10].
As the ﬁrst formally approved Generative AI service regulation on a global scale, the Generative AI
Measures can gain valuable insights from the EU’s approach to delineating diﬀerent actors in the
AI value chain, namely the upstream foundation model providers and downstream deployers. The
responsibilities and obligations of upstream foundation model developers and downstream service
providers need to be meticulously delineated, taking into account the AI production workﬂow,
societal impacts, and economic beneﬁts. The lack of distinction and clear legal status between
diﬀerent players in the AI value chain can have profound consequences. It can lead to ambiguity
in accountability, potentially undermining the governance and overall success of AI services. If
stringent governance disproportionately falls on SMEs and start-ups that adapt these foundational
models for speciﬁc use scenarios, rather than major companies that own the foundational models
with vast data access and computing power, it could impact the economy adversely [2].
4
Closing Remarks
As the world’s ﬁrst Generative artiﬁcial intelligence regulation, the Generative AI Measures
provides valuable insights into data, model, and content governance. It also provides guidelines
4

for user protection, helping other nations navigate the complexities of Generative AI oversight. We
found that the Measures places a strong emphasis on user protection and content management,
granting users the right to challenge or complain about AI systems. Moreover, Generative
AI service providers are mandated to provide timely and transparent responses regarding the
measures taken to address these concerns. Users are also empowered to report such issues to the
relevant governing authorities. However, the Measures used the general term "providers" and
assigned uniform responsibilities to various actors throughout the AI value chain, which can pose
challenges in rule enforcement. In particular, deployers lack access to either model or training
data or have technical resources to assess and alter the system when it malfunctions, violates
regulations, or infringes users’ rights, as stipulated by the Measures.
To address the ambiguities within the Generative AI Measures, a detailed understanding of
how various actors ﬁt within the value chain of the Generative AI is essential. To begin with,
the broad term "provider" should be substituted with the more speciﬁc deﬁnitions of upstream
model providers and downstream deployers. This involves comprehensively mapping their roles
and responsibilities across stages, from data creation and curation to training, adaptation, and
deployment [6]. Upstream foundation model developers might be required to adopt a limited,
staged release [17]. By initially granting access only to security researchers and a select cohort of
stakeholders, potential vulnerabilities or issues can be identiﬁed and resolved prior to a broader
public release. In parallel, it’s crucial for downstream deployers to enhance their mechanisms for
responding to user feedback and complaints. An open and responsive communication system
between foundation model providers, application deployers and application users is instrumental
in identifying and mitigating potential misuse. This collaborative framework enables upstream
developers to oﬀer instructions and maintain vigilant oversight over how their models are being
used to safeguard and update post-deployment. The general purpose of foundation model makes
the risk evaluation and mitigation challenging as many harms are only discovered after a model
has been integrated into downstream products and used by a large user base. Therefore, eﬀective
collaboration between all stakeholders enables downstream deployers to promptly report identiﬁed
issues based on user engagement, facilitating timely updates and communication with upstream
model developers.
The series of legislative actions targeting speciﬁc algorithmic services or applications underscores
China’s recognition of the signiﬁcance of AI oversight and its commitment to an agile governance
strategy. On June 6, 2023, the State Council introduced its Legislative Work Plan for 2023,
which emphasized the need for a Draft Artiﬁcial Intelligence Law [18]. As of now, China has
so far issued the most AI legislation, with a predominant focus on its corporate applications.
We contend that forthcoming legislation should align the governance of AI with its value chain,
ensuring that the oversight of generative AI harmonizes its entire production and deployment life
cycle. Within the Generative AI Measures, Articles 3 and 16 distinctly emphasize "categorized
and graded governance," underscoring the responsibilities of several domain-speciﬁc departments,
such as internet information, education, broadcasting and television, and news and publishing.
We envision a domain-speciﬁc, context-based governance framework that adeptly acknowledges
the distinct roles of diﬀerent actors throughout the AI value chain.
