arXiv:1201.4089v3  [cs.AI]  3 Jun 2013
A Description Logic Primer∗
Markus Krötzsch, František Simanˇcík, Ian Horrocks
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
Abstract. This paper provides a self-contained ﬁrst introduction to description log-
ics (DLs). The main concepts and features are explained with examples before syn-
tax and semantics of the DL SROIQ are deﬁned in detail. Additional sections re-
view lightweight DL languages, discuss the relationship to the OWL Web Ontology
Language and give pointers to further reading.
Introduction
Description logics (DLs) are a family of knowledge representation languages that are
widely used in ontological modelling. An important practical reason for this is that they
provide one of the main underpinnings for the OWL Web Ontology Language as stan-
dardised by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). However, DLs have been used in
knowledge representation long before the advent of ontological modelling in the context
of the Semantic Web, tracing back to ﬁrst DL modelling languages in the mid 1980s.
As their name suggests, DLs are logics (in fact most DLs are decidable fragments
of ﬁrst-order logic), and as such they are equipped with a formal semantics: a precise
speciﬁcation of the meaning of DL ontologies. This formal semantics allows humans and
computer systems to exchange DL ontologies without ambiguity as to their meaning, and
also makes it possible to use logical deduction to infer additional information from the
facts stated explicitly in an ontology – an important feature that distinguishes DLs from
other modelling languages such as UML.
The capability of inferring additional knowledge increases the modelling power of
DLs but it also requires some understanding on the side of the modeller and, above all,
good tool support for computing the conclusions. The computation of inferences is called
reasoning and an important goal of DL language design has been to ensure that reasoning
algorithms of good performance are available. This is one of the reasons why there is not
just a single description logic: the best balance between expressivity of the language and
complexity of reasoning depends on the intended application.
In this paper we provide a self-contained ﬁrst introduction to description logics. We
start by explaining the basic way in which knowledge is modelled in DLs in Section 1
and continue with an intuitive introduction to the most important DL modelling features
in Section 2. This leads us to the rather expressive DL called SROIQ, the syntax of
which we summarise in Section 3. In Section 4, we explain the underlying ideas of DL
∗Version 1.2 of 3 June 2013. Comments and suggestions can be sent to Markus Krötzsch at

By-SA-NC 3.0. Please contact the authors if you would like to reproduce this document under another license.
1

semantics and use it to deﬁne the meaning of SROIQ ontologies. Many DLs can be
obtained by omitting some features of SROIQ and in Section 5 we review some of the
most important DLs obtained in this way. In particular, this includes various lightweight
description logics that allow for particularly eﬃcient reasoning. In Section 6 we discuss
the relationship of DLs to the OWL Web Ontology Language. We conclude with pointers
to further reading in Section 7.
1. Basic Building Blocks of DL Ontologies
Description logics (DLs) provide means to model the relationships between entities in a
domain of interest. In DLs there are three kinds of entities: concepts, roles and individual
names.1 Concepts represent sets of individuals, roles represent binary relations between
the individuals, and individual names represent single individuals in the domain. Readers
familiar with ﬁrst-order logic will recognise these as unary predicates, binary predicates
and constants.
For example, an ontology modelling the domain of people and their family relation-
ships might use concepts such Parent to represent the set of all parents and Female to
represent the set of all female individuals, roles such as parentOf to represent the (bi-
nary) relationship between parents and their children, and individual names such as julia
and john to represent the individuals Julia and John.
Unlike a database, a DL ontology does not fully describe a particular situation or
“state of the world”; rather it consists of a set of statements, called axioms, each of
which must be true in the situation described. These axioms typically capture only partial
knowledge about the situation that the ontology is describing, and there may be many dif-
ferent states of the world that are consistent with the ontology. Although, from the point
of view of logic, there is no principal diﬀerence between diﬀerent types of axioms, it is
customary to separate them into three groups: assertional (ABox) axioms, terminological
(TBox) axioms and relational (RBox) axioms.
1.1. Asserting Facts with ABox Axioms
ABox axioms capture knowledge about named individuals, i.e., the concepts to which
they belong and how they are related to each other. The most common ABox axioms are
concept assertions such as
Mother(julia),
(1)
which asserts that Julia is a mother or, more precisely, that the individual named julia is
an instance of the concept Mother.
Role assertions describe relations between named individuals. The assertion
parentOf(julia, john),
(2)
for example, states that Julia is a parent of John or, more precisely, that the individual
named julia is in the relation that is represented by parentOf to the individual named john.
1In OWL concepts and roles are respectively known as classes and properties; see Section 6.
2

The previous sentence shows that it can be rather cumbersome to explicitly point out that
the relationships expressed by an axiom are really relationships between the individuals,
sets and relations that are represented by the respective individual names, concepts and
roles. Assuming that this subtle distinction between syntactic identiﬁers and semantic
entities is understood, we will thus often adopt a more sloppy and readable formulation.
Section 4 below explains the underlying semantics with greater precision.
Although it is intuitively clear that Julia and John are diﬀerent individuals, this fact
does not logically follow from what we have stated so far. DLs do not make the unique
name assumption, so diﬀerent names might refer to the same individual unless explicitly
stated otherwise. The individual inequality assertion
julia 0 john
(3)
is used to assert that Julia and John are actually diﬀerent individuals. On the other hand,
an individual equality assertion, such as
john ≈johnny,
(4)
states that two diﬀerent names are known to refer to the same individual. Such situations
can arise, for example, when combining knowledge about the same domain from several
diﬀerent sources, a task that is known as ontology alignment.
1.2. Expressing Terminological Knowledge with TBox Axioms
TBox axioms describe relationships between concepts. For example, the fact that all
mothers are parents is expressed by the concept inclusion
Mother ⊑Parent,
(5)
in which case we say that the concept Mother is subsumed by the concept Parent. Such
knowledge can be used to infer further facts about individuals. For example, (1) and (5)
together imply that Julia is a parent.
Concept equivalence asserts that two concepts have the same instances, as in
Person ≡Human.
(6)
While synonyms are an obvious example of equivalent concepts, in practice one more
often uses concept equivalence to give a name to complex expressions as introduced in
Section 2.1 below. Furthermore, such additional concept expressions can be combined
with equivalence and inclusion to describe more complex situations such as the disjoint-
ness of concepts, which asserts that two concepts do not share any instances.
1.3. Modelling Relationships between Roles with RBox Axioms
RBox axioms refer to properties of roles. As for concepts, DLs support role inclusion
and role equivalence axioms. For example, the inclusion
parentOf ⊑ancestorOf
(7)
3

states that parentOf is a subrole of ancestorOf, i.e., every pair of individuals related by
parentOf is also related by ancestorOf. Thus (2) and (7) together imply that Julia is an
ancestor of John.
In role inclusion axioms, role composition can be used to describe roles such as
uncleOf. Intuitively, if Charles is a brother of Julia and Julia is a parent of John, then
Charles is an uncle of John. This kind of relationship between the roles brotherOf,
parentOf and uncleOf is captured by the complex role inclusion axiom
brotherOf ◦parentOf ⊑uncleOf.
(8)
Note that role composition can only appear on the left-hand side of complex role inclu-
sions. Furthermore, in order to retain decidability of reasoning (see the end of Section 4
for a discussion on decidability), complex role inclusions are governed by additional
structural restrictions that specify whether or not a collection of such axioms can be used
together in one ontology.
Nobody can be both a parent and a child of the same individual, so the two roles
parentOf and childOf are disjoint. In DLs we can write disjoint roles as follows:
Disjoint(parentOf, childOf).
(9)
Further RBox axioms include role characteristics such as reﬂexivity, symmetry and
transitivity of roles. These are closely related to a number of other DL features and we
will discuss them again in more detail in Section 2.5.
2. Constructors for Concepts and Roles
The basic types of axioms introduced in Section 1 are rather limited for accurate mod-
elling. To describe more complex situations, DLs allow new concepts and roles to be
built using a variety of diﬀerent constructors. We distinguish concept and role construc-
tors depending on whether concept or role expressions are constructed. In the case of
concepts, one can further separate basic Boolean constructors, role restrictions and nom-
inals/enumerations. At the end of this section, we revisit the additional kinds of RBox
axioms that have been omitted in Section 1.3.
2.1. Boolean Concept Constructors
Boolean concept constructors provide basic Boolean operations that are closely related to
the familiar operations of intersection, union and complement of sets, or to conjunction,
disjunction and negation of logical expressions.
For example, concept inclusions allow us to state that all mothers are female and that
all mothers are parents, but what we really mean is that mothers are exactly the female
parents. DLs support such statements by allowing us to form complex concepts such as
the intersection (also called conjunction)
Female ⊓Parent,
(10)
4

which represents the set of individuals that are both female and parents. A complex
concept can be used in axioms in exactly the same way as an atomic concept, e.g., in the
equivalence Mother ≡Female ⊓Parent.
Union (also called disjunction) is the dual of intersection. For example, the concept
Father ⊔Mother
(11)
describes those individuals that are either fathers or mothers. Again, it can be used in an
axiom such as Parent ≡Father ⊔Mother, which states that a parent is either a father or
a mother (and vice versa).
Sometimes we are interested in individuals that do not belong to a certain concept,
e.g., in women who are not married. These could be described by the complex concept
Female ⊓¬Married,
(12)
where the complement (also called negation) ¬Married represents the set of all individu-
als that are not married.
It is sometimes useful to be able to make a statement about every individual, e.g., to
say that everybody is either male or female. This can be accomplished by the axiom
⊤⊑Male ⊔Female,
(13)
where the top concept ⊤is a special concept with every individual as an instance; it
can be viewed as an abbreviation for C ⊔¬C for an arbitrary concept C. Note that this
modelling is rather coarse as it presupposes that every individual has a gender, which
may not be reasonable for instances of a concept such as Computer. We will see more
useful applications for ⊤later on.
To express that, for the purposes of our modelling, nobody can be both a male and
a female at the same time, we can declare the set of male and the set of female individ-
uals to be disjoint. While ontology languages like OWL provide a basic constructor for
disjointness, it is naturally captured in DLs with the axiom
Male ⊓Female ⊑⊥,
(14)
where the bottom concept ⊥is the dual of ⊤, that is the special concept with no individ-
uals as instances; it can be seen as an abbreviation for C ⊓¬C for an arbitrary concept
C. The above axiom thus says that the intersection of the two concepts is empty.
2.2. Role Restrictions
So far we have seen how to use TBox and RBox axioms to express relationships between
concepts and roles, respectively. The most interesting feature of DLs, however, is their
ability to form statements that link concepts and roles together. For example, there is an
obvious relationship between the concept Parent and the role parentOf, namely, a parent
is someone who is a parent of at least one individual. In DLs, this relationship can be
captured by the concept equivalence
Parent ≡∃parentOf.⊤,
(15)
5

where the existential restriction ∃parentOf.⊤is a complex concept that describes the set
of individuals that are parents of at least one individual (instance of ⊤). Similarly, the
concept ∃parentOf.Female describes those individuals that are parents of at least one
female individual, i.e., those that have a daughter.
To represent the set of individuals all of whose children are female, we use the
universal restriction
∀parentOf.Female.
(16)
It is a common error to forget that (16) also includes those individuals that have no
children at all. More accurately (and less naturally), the axiom can be said to describe
the set of all individuals that have “no children other than female ones,” i.e., that have
“no children that are not female.” Following this wording, the concept (16) could indeed
be equivalently expressed as ¬∃parentOf.¬Female. If this meaning is not intended, one
can describe the individuals who have at least one child and with all their children being
female by the concept (∃parentOf.⊤) ⊓(∀parentOf.Female).
Existential and universal restrictions are useful in combination with the top concept
for expressing domain and range restrictions on roles; that is, restrictions on the kinds of
individual that can be in the domain and range of a given role. To restrict the domain of
sonOf to male individuals we can use the axiom
∃sonOf.⊤⊑Male,
(17)
and to restrict its range to parents we can write
⊤⊑∀sonOf.Parent.
(18)
In combination with the assertion sonOf(john, julia), these axioms would then allow us to
deduce that John is male and Julia is a parent. It is interesting to note how this behaviour
contrasts with the meaning of constraints in databases. Constraints would also allow
us to state, e.g., that all sons must be male. However, given only the fact that John is
a son of Julia, such a constraint would simply be violated (leading to an error) rather
than implying that John is male. Mistaking DL axioms for constraints is a very common
source of modelling errors.
Number restrictions allow us to restrict the number of individuals that can be reached
via a given role. For example, we can form the at-least restriction
⩾2 childOf.Parent
(19)
to describe the set of individuals that are children of at least two parents, and the at-most
restriction
⩽2 childOf.Parent
(20)
for those that are children of at most two parents. The axiom Person ⊑⩾2 childOf.Parent
⊓⩽2 childOf.Parent then states that every person is a child of exactly two parents.
6

Finally, local reﬂexivity can be used to describe the set of individuals that are related
to themselves via a given role. For example, the set of individuals that talk to themselves
is described by the concept
∃talksTo.Self.
(21)
2.3. Nominals
As well as deﬁning concepts in terms of other concepts (and roles), it may also be useful
to deﬁne a concept by simply enumerating its instances. For example, we might deﬁne
the concept Beatle by enumerating its instances: john, paul, george, and ringo. Enumer-
ations are not supported natively in DLs, but they can be simulated in DLs using nomi-
nals. A nominal is a concept that has exactly one instance. For example, {john} is the con-
cept whose only instance is (the individual represented by) john. Combining nominals
with union, the enumeration in our example could be expressed as
Beatle ≡{john} ⊔{paul} ⊔{george} ⊔{ringo}.
(22)
It is interesting to note that, using nominals, a concept assertion Mother(julia) can be
turned into a concept inclusion {julia} ⊑Mother and a role assertion parentOf(julia, john)
into a concept inclusion {julia} ⊑∃parentOf.{john}. This illustrates that the distinction
between ABox and TBox does not have a deeper logical meaning.
2.4. Role Constructors
In contrast to the variety of concept constructors, DLs provide only few constructors for
forming complex roles. In practice, inverse roles are the most important such constructor.
Intuitively, the relationship between the roles parentOf and childOf is that, for example,
if Julia is a parent of John, then John is a child of Julia and vice versa. More formally,
parenfOf is the inverse of childOf, which in DLs can be expressed by the equivalence
parentOf ≡childOf−,
(23)
where the complex role childOf−represents the inverse of childOf.
In analogy to the top concept, DLs also provide the universal role, represented by U,
which always relates all pairs of individuals. It typically plays a minor role in modelling,2
but it establishes symmetry between roles and concepts w.r.t. a top element. Similarly,
an empty role that corresponds to the bottom concept is also available in OWL but has
rarely been introduced as a constructor in DLs; however, we can deﬁne any role R to be
empty using the axiom ⊤⊑¬∃R.⊤(“all things do not relate to anything through R”).
Interestingly, the universal role cannot be deﬁned by TBox axioms using the constructors
introduced above, and in particular universal role restrictions cannot express that a role
is universal.
2Although there are a few interesting things that could be expressed with U, such as concept products [16],
tool support is rarely suﬃcient for using this feature in practice.
7

2.5. More RBox Axioms: Role Characteristics
In Section 1.3 we introduced three forms of RBox axioms: role inclusions, role equiv-
alences and role disjointness. OWL provides a variety of others, namely role transi-
tivity, symmetry, asymmetry, reﬂexivity and irreﬂexivity. These are sometimes consid-
ered as basic axiom types in DLs as well, using some suggestive notation such as
Trans(ancestorOf) to express that the role ancestorOf is transitive. However, such ax-
ioms are just syntactic sugar; all role characteristics can be expressed using the features
of DLs that we have already introduced.
Transitivity is a special form of complex role inclusion. For example, transitivity of
ancestorOf can be captured by the axiom ancestorOf ◦ancestorOf ⊑ancestorOf. A
role is symmetric if it is equivalent to its own inverse, e.g., marriedTo ≡marriedTo−, and
it is asymmetric if it is disjoint from its own inverse, as in Disjoint(parentOf, parentOf−).
If desired, global reﬂexivity can be expressed by imposing local reﬂexivity on the top
concept as in ⊤⊑∃knows.Self. A role is irreﬂexive if it is never locally reﬂexive, as in
the case of ⊤⊑¬∃marriedTo.Self.
3. The Description Logic SROIQ
In this section, we summarise the various features that have been introduced informally
above to provide a comprehensive deﬁnition of DL syntax. Doing so yields the descrip-
tion logic called SROIQ, which is one of the most expressive DLs commonly consid-
ered today. It also largely agrees in expressivity with the ontology language OWL 2 DL,
though there are still some diﬀerences as explained in Section 6.
Formally, every DL ontology is based on three ﬁnite sets of signature symbols: a set
NI of individual names, a set NC of concept names and a set NR of role names. Usually
these sets are assumed to be ﬁxed for some application and are therefore not mentioned
explicitly. Now the set of SROIQ role expressions R (over this signature) is deﬁned by
the following grammar:
R F U | NR | NR−
where U is the universal role (Section 2.4). Based on this, the set of SROIQ concept
expressions C is deﬁned as:
C F NC | (C⊓C) | (C⊔C) | ¬C | ⊤| ⊥| ∃R.C | ∀R.C | ⩾n R.C | ⩽n R.C | ∃R.Self | {NI}
where n is a non-negative integer. As usual, expressions like (C ⊓C) represent any ex-
pression of the form (C ⊓D) with C, D ∈C. It is common to omit parentheses if this
cannot lead to confusion with expressions of diﬀerent semantics. For example, parenthe-
ses do not matter for A ⊔B ⊔C whereas the expressions A ⊓B ⊔C and ∃R.A ⊓B are
ambiguous.
Using the above sets of individual names, roles and concepts, the axioms of SROIQ
can be deﬁned to be of the following basic forms:
8

ABox:
C(NI)
R(NI, NI)
NI ≈NI
NI 0 NI
TBox:
C ⊑C
C ≡C
RBox:
R ⊑R
R ≡R
R ◦R ⊑R
Disjoint(R, R)
with the intuitive meanings as explained in Section 1 and 2.
Roughly speaking, a SROIQ ontology (or knowledge base) is simply a set of such
axioms. To ensure the existence of reasoning algorithms that are correct and terminating,
however, additional syntactic restrictions must be imposed on ontologies. These restric-
tions refer not to single axioms but to the structure of the ontology as a whole, hence they
are called structural restrictions. The two such conditions relevant for SROIQ are based
on the notions of simplicity and regularity. Notably, both are automatically satisﬁed for
ontologies that do not contain complex role inclusion axioms.
A role R in an ontology O is called non-simple if some complex role inclusion axiom
(i.e., one that uses role composition ◦) in O implies instances of R; otherwise it is called
simple. A more precise deﬁnition of the non-simple role expressions of the ontology O
is given by the following rules:
• if O contains an axiom S ◦T ⊑R, then R is non-simple,
• if R is non-simple, then its inverse R−is also non-simple,3
• if R is non-simple and O contains any of the axioms R ⊑S , S ≡R or R ≡S , then
S is also non-simple.
All other roles are called simple.4 Now for a SROIQ ontology it is required that the
following axioms and concepts contain simple roles only:
Restricted axioms:
Disjoint(R, R)
Restricted concept expressions:
∃R.Self
⩾n R.C
⩽n R.C.
The other structural restriction that is relevant for SROIQ is called regularity and is
concerned with RBox axioms only. Roughly speaking, the restriction ensures that cyclic
dependencies between complex role inclusion axioms occur only in a limited form. For
details, please see the pointers given in Section 7. For the introductory treatment in this
paper, it suﬃces to note that regularity, just like simplicity, is a property of the ontology
as a whole that cannot be checked for each axiom individually. An important practical
consequence is that the union of two regular ontologies may no longer be regular. This
must be taken into account when merging ontologies in practice.
4. Description Logic Semantics
The formal meaning of DL axioms is given by their model-theoretic semantics. In par-
ticular, the semantics speciﬁes what the logical consequences of an ontology are. The
formal semantics is therefore the main guideline for every tool that computes logical
consequences of DL ontologies, and a basic understanding of its working is vital to make
3If R = S −already is an inverse role, then R−should be read as S . We do not allow expressions like S −−.
4Whether the universal role U is simple or not is a matter of preference that does not aﬀect the computational
properties of the logic [17]. However, the universal role in OWL 2 is considered non-simple.
9

reasonable modelling choices and to comprehend the results given by software applica-
tions. Luckily, the semantics of description logics is not diﬃcult to understand provided
that some common misconceptions are avoided.
Intuitively speaking, an ontology describes a particular situation in a given domain
of discourse. For example, the axioms in Sections 1 and 2 describe a particular situation
in the “families and relationships” domain. However, ontologies usually cannot fully
specify the situation that they describe. On the one hand, there is no formal relationship
between the symbols we use and the objects that they represent: the individual name
julia, for example, is just a syntactic identiﬁer with no intrinsic meaning. Indeed, the
intended meaning of the identiﬁers in our ontologies has no inﬂuence on their formal
semantics: what we know about them stems only from the ontological axioms. On the
other hand, the axioms in an ontology typically do not provide complete information. For
example, (3) and (4) in Section 1.1 state that some individuals are equal and that others
are unequal, but in many other cases this information might be left unspeciﬁed.
Description logics have been designed to deal with such incomplete information.
Rather than making default assumptions in order to fully specify one particular interpre-
tation for each ontology, the DL semantics generally considers all the possible situations
(i.e., states of the world) where the axioms of an ontology would hold (we also say:
where the axioms are satisﬁed). This characteristic is sometimes called the Open World
Assumption since it keeps unspeciﬁed information open.5 A logical consequence of an
ontology is an axiom that holds in all interpretations that satisfy the ontology, i.e., some-
thing that is true in all conceivable states of the world that agree with what is said in the
ontology. The more axioms an ontology contains, the more speciﬁc are the constraints
that it imposes on possible interpretations, and the fewer interpretations exist that sat-
isfy all of the axioms. Conversely, if fewer interpretations satisfy an ontology, then more
axioms hold in all of them, and more logical consequences follow from the ontology.
The previous two sentences imply that the semantics of description logics is monotonic:
additional axioms always lead to additional consequences, or, more informally, the more
knowledge we feed into a DL system the more results it returns.
An extreme case is when an ontology is not satisﬁed in any interpretation. The ontol-
ogy is then called unsatisﬁable or inconsistent. In this case every axiom holds vacuously
in all of the (zero) interpretations that satisfy the ontology. Such an ontology is clearly of
no utility, and avoiding inconsistency (and checking for it in the ﬁrst place) is therefore
an important task during modelling.
We have outlined above the most important ideas of DL semantics. What remains
to be done is to deﬁne what we really mean by an “interpretation” and which conditions
must hold for particular axioms to be satisﬁed by an interpretation. For this, we closely
follow the intuitive ideas established above: an interpretation I consists of a set ∆I called
the domain of I and an interpretation function ·I that maps each atomic concept A to a
set AI ⊆∆I, each atomic role R to a binary relation RI ⊆∆I × ∆I, and each individual
name a to an element aI ∈∆I. The interpretation of complex concepts and roles follows
from the interpretation of the basic entities. Table 1 shows how to obtain the semantics
of each compound expression from the semantics of its parts. By “RI-successor of x” we
mean any individual y such that ⟨x, y⟩∈RI. The deﬁnition should conﬁrm the intuitive
5A Closed World Assumption “closes” the interpretation by assuming that every fact not explicitly stated
to be true is actually false. Both terms are not formally speciﬁed and rather outline the general ﬂavour of a
semantics than any particular deﬁnition.
10

Table 1. Syntax and semantics of SROIQ constructors
Syntax
Semantics
Individuals:
individual name
a
aI
Roles:
atomic role
R
RI
inverse role
R−
{⟨x, y⟩| ⟨y, x⟩∈RI}
universal role
U
∆I × ∆I
Concepts:
atomic concept
A
AI
intersection
C ⊓D
CI ∩DI
union
C ⊔D
CI ∪DI
complement
¬C
∆I \ CI
top concept
⊤
∆I
bottom concept
⊥
∅
existential restriction
∃R.C
{x | some RI-successor of x is in CI}
universal restriction
∀R.C
{x | all RI-successors of x are in CI}
at-least restriction
⩾n R.C
{x | at least n RI-successors of x are in CI}
at-most restriction
⩽n R.C
{x | at most n RI-successors of x are in CI}
local reﬂexivity
∃R.Self
{x | ⟨x, x⟩∈RI}
nominal
{a}
{aI}
where a, b ∈NI are individual names, A ∈NC is a concept name, C, D ∈C are concepts, R ∈R is a role
Table 2. Syntax and semantics of SROIQ axioms
Syntax
Semantics
ABox:
concept assertion
C(a)
aI ∈CI
role assertion
R(a, b)
⟨aI, bI⟩∈RI
individual equality
a ≈b
aI = bI
individual inequality
a 0 b
aI , bI
TBox:
concept inclusion
C ⊑D
CI ⊆DI
concept equivalence
C ≡D
CI = DI
RBox:
role inclusion
R ⊑S
RI ⊆S I
role equivalence
R ≡S
RI = S I
complex role inclusion
R1 ◦R2 ⊑S
RI
1 ◦RI
2 ⊆S I
role disjointness
Disjoint(R, S )
RI ∩S I = ∅
explanations given for each case in Section 2. For example, the semantics of Female ⊓
Parent is indeed the intersection of the semantics of Female and Parent.
Since an interpretation I ﬁxes the meaning of all entities, we can unambiguously
say for each axiom whether it holds in I or not. An axiom α holds in I (we also say I
satisﬁes α and write I |= α) if the corresponding condition in Table 2 is met. Again, these
deﬁnitions fully agree with the intuitive explanations given in Section 1. If all axioms
in an ontology O hold in I (i.e., if I satisﬁes O, written I |= O), then I is a model
11

of O. Thus a model is an abstraction of a state of the world that satisﬁes all axioms in
the ontology. An ontology is consistent if it has at least one model. An axiom α is a
consequence of an ontology O (or O entails α, written O |= α) if α holds in every model
of O. In particular, an inconsistent ontology entails every axiom.
A noteworthy consequence of this semantics is the meaning of individual names in
DL ontologies. We already remarked that DLs do not usually make the Unique Name
Assumption, and indeed our formal deﬁnition allows two individual names to be inter-
preted as the same individual (element of the domain). Possibly even more important is
the fact that the domain of an interpretation is allowed to contain many individuals that
are not represented by any individual name. A common confusion in modelling arises
from the implicit assumption that interpretations must only contain individuals that are
represented by individual names (such individuals are also called named individuals).
For example, one could wrongly assume the ontology consisting of the axioms
parentOf(julia, john)
manyChildren(julia)
manyChildren ⊑⩾3 parentOf.⊤
to be inconsistent since it requires Julia to have at least 3 children when only one (John)
is given. However, there are many conceivable models where Julia does have three chil-
dren, even though only one of the children is explicitly named. A signiﬁcant number of
modelling errors can be traced back to similar misconceptions that are easy to prevent if
the general open world assumption of DLs is kept in mind.
Another point to note is that the above speciﬁcation of the semantics does not pro-
vide any hint as to how to compute the relevant entailments in practical software tools.
There are inﬁnitely many possible interpretations, each of which may have an inﬁnite
domain (in fact there are some ontologies that are satisﬁed only by interpretations with
inﬁnite domains). Therefore it is impossible to test all interpretations to see if they model
a given ontology, and impossible to test all models of an ontology to see if they entail a
given axiom. Rather, one has to devise deduction procedures and prove their correctness
with respect to the above speciﬁcation. The interplay of certain expressive features can
make reasoning algorithms more complicated and in some cases it can even be shown
that no correct and terminating algorithm exists at all (i.e., that reasoning is undecid-
able). For our purposes it suﬃces to know that entailment of axioms is decidable for
SROIQ (with the structural restrictions explained in Section 3) and that a number of
free and commercial tools are available. Such tools are typically optimised for more spe-
ciﬁc reasoning problems, such as consistency checking, the entailment of concept sub-
sumptions (subsumption checking) or of concept assertions (instance checking). Many
of these standard inferencing problems can be expressed in terms of each other, so they
can be handled by very similar reasoning algorithms.
5. Important Fragments of SROIQ
Many diﬀerent description logics have been introduced in the literature. Typically, they
can be characterised by the types of constructors and axioms that they allow, which are
often a subset of the constructors in SROIQ. For example, the description logic ALC
is the fragment of SROIQ that allows no RBox axioms and only ⊓, ⊔, ¬, ∃and ∀as its
concept constructors. The extension of ALC with transitive roles is traditionally denoted
12

by the letter S. Some other letters used in DL names hint at a particular constructor, such
as inverse roles I, nominals O, qualiﬁed number restrictions Q, and role hierarchies (role
inclusion axioms without composition) H. So, for example, the DL named ALCHIQ
extends ALC with role hierarchies, inverse roles and qualiﬁed number restrictions. The
letter R most commonly refers to the presence of role inclusions, local reﬂexivity Self,
and the universal role U, as well as the additional role characteristics of transitivity, sym-
metry, asymmetry, role disjointness, reﬂexivity, and irreﬂexivity. This naming scheme
explains the name SROIQ.
In recent years, fragments of DLs have been speciﬁcally developed in order to ob-
tain favourable computational properties. For this purpose, ALC is already too large,
since it only admits reasoning algorithms that run in worst-case exponential time. More
lightweight DLs can be obtained by further restricting expressivity, while at the same
time a number of additional SROIQ features can be added without loosing the good
computational properties. The three main approaches for obtaining lightweight DLs are
EL, DLP and DL-Lite, which also correspond to language fragments OWL EL, OWL RL
and OWL QL of the Web Ontology Language.
The EL family of description logics is characterised by allowing unlimited use of
existential quantiﬁers and concept intersection. The original description logic EL allows
only those features and ⊤but no unions, complements or universal quantiﬁers, and no
RBox axioms. Further extensions of this language are known as EL+ and EL++. The
largest such extension allows the constructors ⊓, ⊤, ⊥, ∃, Self, nominals and the univer-
sal role, and it supports all types of axioms other than role symmetry, asymmetry and
irreﬂexivity. Interestingly, all standard reasoning tasks for this DL can still be solved in
worst-case polynomial time. One can even drop the structural restriction of regularity that
is important for SROIQ. EL has been used to model large but lightweight ontologies
that consist mainly of terminological data, in particular in the life sciences. A number of
reasoners are speciﬁcally optimised for handling EL-type ontologies, the most recent of
which is the ELK reasoner for OWL EL.6
DLP is short for Description Logic Programs and comprises various DLs that are
syntactically restricted in such a way that axioms could also be read as rules in ﬁrst-order
Horn logic without function symbols. Due to this, DLP-type logics can be considered as
kinds of rule languages (hence the name OWL RL) contained in DLs. To accomplish this,
one has to allow diﬀerent syntactic forms for subconcepts and superconcepts in concept
inclusion axioms. We do not provide the details here. While DLs in general may require
us to consider domain elements that are not represented by individual names, for DLP
one can always restrict attention to models in which all domain elements are represented
by individual names. This is why DLP is often used to augment databases (interpreted as
sets of ABox axioms), e.g., in an implementation of OWL RL in the Oracle 11g database
management system.
DL-Lite is a family of DLs that is also used in combination with large data collec-
tions and existing databases, in particular to augment the expressivity of a query lan-
guage that retrieves such data. This approach, known as Ontology Based Data Access,
considers ontologies as a language for constructing views or mapping rules on top of
existing data. The core feature of DL-Lite is that data access can be realised with stan-
dard query languages such as SQL that are not aware of the DL semantics. Ontological
6http://elk-reasoner.googlecode.com/
13

information is merely used in a query preprocessing step. Like DLP, DL-Lite requires
diﬀerent syntactic restrictions for subconcepts and superconcepts. We do not present the
details here.
6. Relationship to OWL
The OWL Web Ontology Language is a knowledge representation language standardised
by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). OWL is one of the most important appli-
cations of description logics today. In this section, we brieﬂy outline the relationship of
the two languages. A comprehensive treatment is beyond the scope of this paper; see
Section 7 for pointers to further reading. The current version of the OWL speciﬁcation is
OWL 2 as standardised in 2009. This supersedes the earlier OWL 1 standard of 2004.
The main building blocks of OWL are indeed very similar to those of DLs, with
the main diﬀerence that concepts are called classes and roles are called properties. It is
therefore not surprising that description logics have had a major inﬂuence on the devel-
opment of OWL and the expressive features that it provides. Historically, however, OWL
has also been conceived as an extension to RDF, a Web data modelling language whose
expressivity is comparable to DL ABoxes. The formal semantics of RDF is subtly diﬀer-
ent from that of DLs, even though both lead to the same consequences in many common
cases. Extending the RDF semantics to the expressive features of OWL improves the
compatibility between the two, but it also makes reasoning undecidable. Therefore, it has
been decided to specify both styles of formal semantics for OWL: the Direct Semantics
based on DLs and the RDF-based Semantics.
In this section, we are therefore mainly interested in the Direct Semantics of OWL.
This semantics is only deﬁned for OWL ontologies that abide by certain syntactic re-
strictions (essentially the restriction that the OWL axioms can be read as SROIQ ax-
ioms for which the structural restrictions of Section 3 are satisﬁed). This syntactic frag-
ment of OWL is called OWL DL.7 Under the Direct Semantics, large parts of OWL DL
can indeed be considered as a syntactic variant of SROIQ. For example, the axiom
Mother ≡Female ⊓Parent would be written as follows in OWL:
EquivalentClasses( Mother ObjectIntersectionOf( Female Parent ) )
where the symbols Mother, Female and Parent would be identiﬁer strings that conform
to the OWL speciﬁcation.8 The above example illustrates the close relationship between
the syntax of SROIQ and that of OWL. In many cases, it is indeed enough to translate
an operator symbol of SROIQ into the corresponding operator name in OWL, which is
then written in preﬁx notation like a function. This is also why the above form of syntax
is called Functional-Style Syntax. The OWL standard provides a number of syntactic
forms that can be used to express OWL ontologies. The most prominent among these
is the RDF/XML serialisation since it is the only format that all conforming OWL tools
7In contrast, the OWL language without any syntactic constraints is called OWL Full. It comprises ontologies
that can only be interpreted under the RDF-based Semantics.
8Entity names in OWL are generally based on Uniform Resource Identiﬁers (URIs). The details are not
relevant here.
14

need to understand. On the other hand, it is more diﬃcult for humans to read and we do
not present it here.
It is interesting to note that there are still a few diﬀerences between OWL DL under
the Direct Semantics and SROIQ. On a syntactic level, OWL provides a lot more oper-
ators that, though logically redundant, can be convenient as shortcuts for compound DL
axioms. For example, OWL has special constructs for specifying domain and range of
a property, even though these could equally well be expressed as in Section 2.2. These
kinds of features also include the empty (bottom) property, which can easily be deﬁned
but is not included as a language feature in DLs.
However, OWL also includes some expressive features that we did not include in
our treatment of SROIQ above. Most notably, this includes support for datatypes and
datatype literals. These behave like classes and individual names but come with a ﬁxed,
pre-deﬁned interpretation. For example, the datatype for Boolean values has exactly two
elements – true and false – in any interpretation. This can also be introduced in DLs
by so-called concrete domains, i.e., pre-deﬁned interpretation domains. Both DLs and
OWL in this case strictly distinguish roles/properties that relate to “abstract” individuals
from those that relate to values from some datatype. In OWL, the constructs that relate to
datatypes include “Data” in their name while constructs that relate to abstract individu-
als include “Object.” For example, OWL distinguishes ObjectIntersectionOf (used
above) from DataIntersectionOf (the intersection of datatypes).
The only other logical feature that is missing in DLs are so-called Keys. These are
special forms of rules that can be used for data integration. Roughly speaking, a key spec-
iﬁes that two named individuals are entailed to be equal if they agree on certain property
values and class memberships, similar to key constraints in databases. For example, the
combination of nationality and registration number might be treated as a key for (i.e.,
suﬃcient to uniquely identify) motor vehicles.
Besides the logical features, OWL also includes a number of other aspects that are
not considered in description logics at all. For example, it includes means of naming
an ontology and of importing ontological axioms from one ontology into another. Fur-
ther extra-logical features include a simple form of meta-modelling called punning, non-
logical axioms to declare identiﬁers, and the possibility to add annotations to arbitrary
axioms and entities similar to comments in a programming language.
7. Further Reading
This paper can only provide a ﬁrst introduction to description logics and OWL. More de-
tailed introductory texts can be found in the lecture notes of the Reasoning Web Summer
School: Rudolph provides a detailed discussion of DL semantics and modelling [15],
Baader gives a general overview with extended historical notes [1], and Sattler focusses
on tableau-based reasoning methods [18]. An extensive introduction to lightweight de-
scription logics is given by Krötzsch [12].
For a more detailed coverage of OWL and its relationship to DL, we recommend
the textbook Foundations of Semantic Web Technologies [8]. This introductory text also
treats the relationship of DLs to ﬁrst-order logic, DL query answering and extensions for
rule-based modelling (related to keys in OWL), which we have omitted here. An in-depth
treatment of description logics and related research topics is provided by the Description
15

Logic Handbook [3], which also covers interesting aspects of deduction algorithms and
computational complexity that are beyond the scope of this paper.
A number of research papers focus on speciﬁc topics in DLs. Closely related to this
paper is the original article on SROIQ, which also provides the details on regularity con-
ditions that have been skipped above [9]. A detailed discussion of OWL datatypes and
their description logic semantics is given by Motik and Horrocks [13]. There are also var-
ious works that focus on EL [2,10], DLP/OWL RL [6,11] and DL-Lite [4]. Current de-
velopments in DL research are discussed at the annual DL Workshop (see http://dl.kr.org/
for proceedings) and at the major Semantic Web and Artiﬁcial Intelligence conferences.
The primary resources on OWL 2 are the online documents of the speciﬁcation [14]
where the OWL Primer provides a ﬁrst introduction [7]. The diﬀerences of the 2009
OWL 2 standard to its predecessor are explained in [5].
Many related tools such as reasoners and ontology editors are available. The most
popular free ontology editor is Protégé,9 which can be used with a variety of OWL
reasoners. Pointers to current OWL reasoners are best found online.10 Popular systems
for large parts of OWL 2 DL (SROIQ) include FaCT++, HermiT, Pellet and Racer-
Pro. Some typical lightweight systems are ELK (OWL EL), jCEL (OWL EL), Owlgress
(OWL QL), OWLIM (OWL RL and QL), Quonto (OWL QL) and Snorocket (OWL EL).
Details about these tools and related publications can be found on the respective home-
pages.
