Finding Risk-Averse Shortest Path with
Time-dependent Stochastic Costs
Dajian Li∗
Paul Weng†
Orkun Karabasoglu‡
August 23, 2018
Abstract
In this paper, we tackle the problem of risk-averse route planning in
a transportation network with time-dependent and stochastic costs. To
solve this problem, we propose an adaptation of the A* algorithm that
accommodates any risk measure or decision criterion that is monotonic
with ﬁrst-order stochastic dominance. We also present a case study of our
algorithm on the Manhattan, NYC, transportation network.
Keywords: Route Planning, Shortest Path, Risk-averse decision-
making, Conditional Value-At-Risk, Time-dependent Stochastic
Costs
1
Introduction
Shortest path problems have been extensively studied as they are canonical
problems that appear in many domains, for instance transportation [2, 7], arti-
ﬁcial intelligence [28] or circuit design [25] to cite a few. The standard version
of this problem can easily be solved with classic shortest path algorithms such
as the Dijkstra algorithm [8] or the A* algorithm [16].
In this paper, we focus more particularly on route planning in transporta-
tion networks.
While classically route planning operates with deterministic
information (e.g., expected travel duration), with the advent of intelligent trans-
portation systems that provide real-time and historical traﬃc data, it becomes
possible to design route planning approaches that take into account the stochas-
tic and time-dependent nature of traﬃc condition. Indeed, as more and more
cities open the access to historical traﬃc data, it is now possible to estimate a
probability distribution over durations for each street at diﬀerent times of the
day. Such information can then serve as input to determine ”shortest” paths
that takes into account the variability of durations.
More speciﬁcally, in this paper we focus on building a risk-averse route plan-
ning system for drivers in networks with stochastic and time-dependent costs.
For a given origin and destination positions, it determines a shortest risk-averse
path with respect to a pre-speciﬁed risk measure or decision criterion. With
this system, a driver could not only plan their trip in advance, but also avoid
possible congestions. Consequently, this system could help reduce in particular
travel time, traﬃc congestion and as a consequence exhaust emissions.

1
arXiv:1701.00642v1  [cs.AI]  3 Jan 2017

The contributions of this paper are twofold. First, we propose an adaption of
the A* algorithm, which extends and uniﬁes previous algorithms [6, 24] for com-
puting a risk-averse shortest path in transportation networks where costs are
stochastic and time-dependent. Our approach can accommodate any risk mea-
sure or decision criterion that is monotonic with respect to ﬁrst-order stochastic
dominance. Second, we demonstrate our proposition in the Manhattan, NYC
transportation network with Conditional Value-at-Risk as a risk measure.
The paper is structured as follows. The next section discusses the related
work.
Section 3 recalls the standard shortest path problem and the A* al-
gorithm.
Section 4 deﬁnes the time-dependent stochastic-cost shortest path
problem tackled in this paper. Section 5 presents an adapted version of the A*
algorithm to solve our problem. Section 6 demonstrates our solution algorithm
to route planning in Manhattan, NYC. Finally, we conclude in Section 7.
2
Related Work
Over the past decades, much eﬀort has been devoted to the solution of the
shortest path problem and its many variants.
Classic shortest-path algorithms such as the Bellman-Ford algorithm [4, 11,
19], the Dijkstra algorithm [8] or the A* algorithm [16] have been proposed
before 1970s to solve the static version of the problem where edge costs are scalar
and constant. However, in route planning, drivers usually value more travel
times than distances, which has several implications. Edge costs are generally
non-stationary, that is they are a function of time (e.g., driving the same street
during peak hours or during normal hours lead to diﬀerent durations). They
also tend to be random, depending on traﬃc conditions and other drivers. For
these reasons, those classic algorithms for static shortest-path problems need to
be adapted to this more general setting.
On the one hand, many studies have considered the non-stationary case,
i.e., time-dependent shortest path problem (TDSPP). Dreyfus [9] extended the
Dijkstra algorithm to TDSPP and Goldberg et al. [15] solved TDSPP with a
variant of the A* algorithm. TDSPP has been proven to be solvable in polyno-
mial time under the First In First Out (FIFO) property (i.e., which forbids an
earlier arrival time while traversing an edge at a later time) [18] while it reveals
to be an NP-hard problem without the FIFO property [23].
On the other hand, since Frank [12] studied stochastic-cost shortest path
problem (SSPP), extensive work has been done on this problem (e.g., [31, 21,
14, 24]). Bertsekas et al. [5] considered an even more general class of stochastic
shortest path problems (where node transitions are stochastic) and modeled
them as a Markov Decision Problem [26].
In SSPP, some researchers, such
as Nie et al. [21], aimed at determining a shortest path guaranteeing a given
probability of arriving on time. Recently, Gavriel et al. [14] and Parmentier et
al. [24] investigated risk-averse versions of SSPP by considering diﬀerent risk
measures, such as conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR) [10]. However, neither of
them considered the case where costs are time-dependent.
Besides, some work also tackles problems where edge costs are both non-
stationary and random.
Fu et al.
[13] considered the problem of expected
shortest paths in dynamic and stochastic traﬃc networks. Chen et al. [6] studied
time-dependent stochastic shortest path problems and proposed an adapted A*
algorithm with ﬁrst-order stochastic dominance in order to compute a reliable
2

shortest path. However, the risk measure they use is Value-at-Risk (VaR) [17],
which may not always be the most suitable measure. In this paper, we propose
a practical algorithm for any risk measure that is monotonic with respect to
ﬁrst-order stochastic dominance (as in [24]) and test it with CVaR, which may
be considered a better criterion than VaR as it has better properties [1] and
takes into account not only VaR but also the tail distribution.
3
Background
We ﬁrst recall the deﬁnition of the classic shortest path problem. Let G = (V, E)
be a directed graph (e.g., corresponding to a transportation network) where V is
a set of nodes (e.g., intersections and landmarks in a city) and E ⊂V 2 is a set of
directed edges (e.g., lanes of streets). The set of successors of a node n is denoted
E+(n), i.e., E+(n) = {n′ ∈V | (n, n′) ∈E}. A path π of length k in G is a
sequence of k edges in E: (n1, n2), (n2, n3), . . . , (nk, nk+1). For convenience, we
write π = (n1, n2, . . . , nk+1). A subpath of a path is a consecutive subsequence
of edges of that path.
The edges of graph G are assumed to be valued by a cost function c : E →R
(e.g., representing the distance or duration of travel in an edge). We assume
that costs are non-negative. By extension, the cost of a (sub)path π, denoted
c(π), is deﬁned as the sum of the costs of the edges in that (sub)path. Let πon
be a subpath from node o to node n and πnd a subpath from node n to node
d. We denote πon ⊕πnd the path obtained from the concatenation of the two
subpaths. Obviously, c(πon ⊕πnd) = c(πon) + c(πnd).
Let o ∈V (resp. d ∈V ) be an origin (resp. destination) node. The shortest
path problem consists in searching for the path starting from node o and ending
in node d that has the lowest cost. Many eﬃcient algorithms, such as the Ford-
Bellman algorithm [11, 4] or the Dijkstra algorithm [8], have been proposed to
solve this problem. In the case of transportation networks where the number
of nodes may be large, those algorithms, even though polynomial in the size of
graph G may become impractical. In that case, the A* algorithm may help to
determine a shortest path faster.
The A* algorithm, proposed by Hart et al. [16], has been widely accepted
as an eﬃcient algorithm to solve the shortest path problem.
As it is well-
known, we only recall its principle and not its pseudo-code for space reasons.
In this algorithm, an extra heuristic information is assumed to be given: for
any node n, an estimation h(n) of the cost of the shortest path from node n to
destination node d is available. For instance, in transportation networks, where
path distances are minimized, h(n) can be deﬁned as the Euclidean distance
from node n to destination node d. The A* algorithm ﬁnds a path from origin
node o to destination node d by exploring a tree of (sub)paths following a best-
ﬁrst-search strategy. In order to choose the best subpath to extend, the A*
algorithm usually maintains a priority queue O of nodes representing subpaths
ending in those nodes. The priority f(n) of a subpath πon ending in a node n
is deﬁned as the sum of the cost cumulated so far and the heuristic estimation,
i.e., f(n) = g(n) + h(n) where f(n) represents an estimation of the cost of of
a path to node d whose subpath is πon, g(n) is the cost of πon and h(n) is the
heuristic estimation of the cost of a subpath from node n to node d.
Heuristic function h(n) plays a signiﬁcant role in the A* algorithm by inﬂu-
encing the number of (sub)paths A* algorithm will examine. Besides, whether
3

the A* algorithm can eventually ﬁnd the shortest path in the graph depends on
the selection of the heuristic function h(n). In order to guarantee the soundness
of the A* algorithm, h(n) should satisfy the following inequality: ∀n ∈V ,
h(n) ≤min
πnd c(πnd)
(1)
where πnd represents a subpath from node n to node d. This property means
that the heuristic information provided by h(n) is a lower bound to the best
possible cost to reach node d from node n. For instance, the heuristic func-
tion deﬁned as the Euclidean distance is admissible. A heuristic function that
satisﬁes inequality (1) is called an admissible heuristic function.
4
Problem Statement
We start with some notations.
For any random variable X, we denote PX
its probability densition function (pdf), FX its cumulative distribution (i.e.,
FX(c) =
R c
−∞PX(x)dx) and F −1
X
the (pseudo)inverse of FX (i.e., F −1
X (α) =
inf{c ∈R | FX(c) ≥α}).
In a real transportation network, the duration for traversing an edge (i.e.,
portion of a street) is stochastic and dynamic. Such a network can be repre-
sented as a directed graph G = (V, E) as before, however, edge costs are now
time-dependent real random variables.
For an edge (n, n′), random variable
Ct(n, n′) denotes the random cost of traversing that edge at time t. We assume
random costs take non-negative values (representing durations) and S-FIFO1
(Stochastic FIFO) [21], which is a natural property in transportation networks,
holds.
For a path π = (n1, n2, . . . , nk+1), its cost Ct(π) for a departure time t is
also a random variable deﬁned as the sum of the random costs of its edges.
It
can be written recursively as follows:
Ct(π) = Ct(π′) + Ct+Ct(π′)(nk, nk+1)
(2)
where π′ = (n1, n2, . . . , nk). In a similar fashion, the pdf of Ct(π) can be written:
PCt(π)(c) =
Z +∞
−∞
PCt(π′)(x)PCt+x(nk,nk+1)(c −x)dx
(3)
The problem we tackle in this paper can then be formulated: given a risk-
averse criterion or risk measure ρ : X →R (with X the set of real random
variables), we search for the ρ-minimum path π∗for a departure time t, i.e.,
ρ(Ct(π∗)) = min
π ρ(Ct(π))
(4)
We call π∗a risk-averse shortest path.
We assume that criterion ρ satisﬁes
a consistency property that relates ρ to the ﬁrst-order stochastic dominance,
which is a partial order deﬁned over probability distributions [30].
Deﬁnition 4.1 First-order stochastic dominance (FSD) is deﬁned as follows:
Let F1, F2 be two cumulative distributions, F1 (weakly) ﬁrst-order-stochastically
dominates (or FSD-dominates) F2, denoted F1 ≿F SD F2, iﬀ∀x, F1(x) ≤F2(x).
An illustration of FSD is shown in Figure 1.
1 The SFIFO property states that for any conﬁdence level α, leaving later cannot lead to
an earlier arrival time: t ≤t′ =⇒t + F −1Ct(α) ≤t′ + F −1Ct′ (α) where t, t′ are departure
times, Ct, Ct′ random costs of an edge and α ∈[0, 1].
4

Figure 1: Illustration of First-Order Stochastic Dominance: the green cumula-
tive distributions FSD-dominates the blue and red ones, while the latter two
are incomparable.
The consistency property that we assume states that ρ is monotonic with
respect to ﬁrst-order stochastic dominance:
FSD FX ≿F SD FY ⇒ρ(X) ≥ρ(Y )
where X and Y are two real random variables and FX and FY are their respec-
tive cumulative distributions. This property is important because it will allow
us to prune in the adapted A* algorithm.
Let us introduce another property that states that ρ is increasing with the
addition of a non-negative random variable:
INC ρ(X) ≤ρ(X + C)
where X and C are two real random variables and C takes non-negative values.
In our setting, this is a natural property as random variables represent durations.
To prove that FSD implies INC, we ﬁrst introduce a lemma2:
Lemma 4.1 Let X be a real random variable and C be a non-negative real
random variable. Then, FX+C ≿F SD FX.
Then, as a direct consequence of Lemma 4.1, we obtain:
Proposition 4.2 If ρ satisﬁes FSD, ρ also satisﬁes INC.
As illustrations of ρ, we present three examples, Value-at-Risk, Conditional
Value-at-Risk and Expected Utility, which all satisfy FSD (and therefore INC).
Example 1.
Value-at-Risk (VaR) [17] is a widely-used risk measure in ﬁnance.
For a ﬁxed α ∈[0, 1], it represents the threshold loss value, such that the proba-
bility the loss on an investment exceeds this value is α. Formally, in our context,
it is deﬁned by: V aRα(X) = F −1
X (α) = inf{x ∈R | FX(x) ≥α} In other terms,
V aRα(X) is deﬁned in our context as the α-quantile of random variable X. It
is well-known that VaR satisﬁes FSD [3].
Example 2. Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR) [10], also called Expected Short-
fall is a risk measure that reﬁnes VaR. Because VaR is a threshold value (for
a single ﬁxed probability α), it neglects the risk at the tail of the distribution.
CVaR remedies this shortcoming of VaR by measuring the expected loss at the
2For space reasons, we do not include the proofs.
5

tail above VaR. CVaR is mathematically deﬁned by: CV aRα(X) = E[X | X ≥
V aRα(X)] where X is a real random variable. The beneﬁt of using CVaR in-
stead of VaR is that CVaR takes into account not only the VaR value but also
the tail information of a distribution. CVaR is known to satisfy FSD [3].
Example 3. Expected Utility (EU) is a well-known decision criterion in decision
under risk [20] and decision under uncertainty [29], which is known to satisfy
FSD [3]. It is deﬁned as follows: EU(X) = E(u(X)) where X is a real random
variable and u : R →R is a so-called von Neumann-Morgenstern utility function.
The utility value u(x) represents how much x is valuable. For this reason, func-
tion u is assumed to be monotonic (i.e., in our settings, x ≤y ⇒u(x) ≥u(y)).
In decision theory, it is well-known that a concave (resp. convex) function u
leads to a risk-averse (resp. risk-seeking) decision criterion. Although we focus
on risk-averse criteria in this paper (as it is most people’s concern in transporta-
tion), note that our approach could also tackle the risk-seeking case.
There are many other possible examples of ρ that satisﬁes property FSD:
for instance, semideviations [22], rank-dependent utility [27], Yaari’s dual model
[32]... Our solution algorithm covers all those cases.
5
Solution Algorithm
We propose an algorithm that is an adapted version of the standard A* al-
gorithm to solve the proposed risk-averse shortest path problem using time-
dependent stochastic costs.
It generalizes the algorithm proposed by Chen
et al. [6] to general ρ measures that satisﬁes FSD and extends the algorithm
proposed by Parmentier et al. [24] to the time-dependent cost setting.
The proposed algorithm keeps the basic features of the standard A* algo-
rithm, for example, an open set O while adding new features such as labeling
with random variables and path pruning using FSD dominance.
We now
explain why the notions of label (for evaluating the value of a subpath ending
in node n) and priority (for guiding the order the subpaths are examined) need
to be redeﬁned in our setting and how they can be redeﬁned. In the standard
A* algorithm for computing a shortest path, a node n in the priority queue
O is the end node of a subpath for which only one label (i.e., cumulated cost
g(n) = c(πon)) needs to be stored. This is possible because we have ∀n ∈V :
c(πon) ≤c(π′
on) =⇒c(πon ⊕πnd) ≤c(π′
on ⊕πnd)
where πon and π′
on are two paths from node o to node n and πnd is a path from
n to d. Unfortunately, in our setting, a counterpart of these inequalities with
respect to ρ does not hold, due to the possible non-linearity of criterion ρ:
ρ(Ct(πon)) ≤ρ(Ct(π′
on))
̸=⇒ρ(Ct(πon ⊕πnd)) ≤ρ(Ct(π′
on ⊕πnd))
(5)
In words, a dominated subpath can become non-dominated when extended.
Example 4.
We give an example for the case when ρ is VaR with α = 95%.
Assume the probability distributions are given in Table 1. One can check that:
V aR(Ct(πon)) = 1 < 2 = V aR(Ct(π′
on)) and
V aR(Ct(πon ⊕πnd)) = 3 > 2 = V aR(Ct(π′
on ⊕πnd))
As a consequence of (5), labels have a more complex form. Following previous
6

Algorithm 1: Proposed adapted A* algorithm
Data: graph G = (V, E), random costs Ct, heuristic h, criterion ρ,
upperbound UB, origin node o, destination node d, departure
time t
Result: risk-averse shortest path
1 begin
2
O ←{(o, 0)}
3
while O ̸= ∅do
4
(n, C) ←highest priority pair in O
5
if n = d then return corresponding path remove (n, C) from O
6
for n′ ∈E+(n) do
7
C′ ←C + Ct+C(n, n′)
▷initial time t + C selects the edge
cost
8
f(n′, C′) ←ρ(C′ + h(n′))
9
if n′ = d and f(n′, C′) < UB then
10
UB ←f(n′, C′)
11
else
12
if f(n′, C′) ≥UB then continue
13
if n′ /∈O then
14
add (n′, C′) in O
15
else
16
if C′ not FSD-dominating any (n′, C′′) ∈O then
17
add (n′, C′) in O and remove FSD-dominating
(n′, C′′) ∈O
18
else
19
continue
20
return ∅
Table 1: Cumulative distributions.
x
0
1
2
3
4
FCt(πon)
0
0.95
1
1
1
FCt(π′
on)
0.9
0.9
1
1
1
FCt(πnd)
0.8
0.9
1
1
1
FCt(πon⊕πnd) 0
0.76
0.895
0.995
1
FCt(π′on⊕πnd) 0.72
0.81
0.98
0.99
1
related work [21, 6, 24], the label of node n is deﬁned as Ct(πon) instead of
ρ(Ct(πon)). For a given node, two labels can be compared with FSD-dominance
(thanks to Corollary 5.2). As it is a partial order, a node can then receive several
labels. For this reason, elements of O are pairs (n, C) where n is a node and C
is a random variable representing the cost of a subpath from node o to node n.
The priority of a pair (n, C) in O is deﬁned as f(n, C) = ρ(C + h(n)) where
h(n) is a known heuristic evaluation of a subpath from node n to node o. We
assume that h(n) is FSD-dominated by the random cost of any subpath from
node n to node d. Heuristic h(n) can be a deterministic value [6] as usual or
7

more generally a random variable [24].
Deﬁning the label as such and comparing them with FSD dominance are
justiﬁed because of the following lemma [21, 6, 24] and corollary, written for
X, Y, Z three real random variables.
Lemma 5.1 If FX ≿F SD FY , then FX+Z ≿F SD FY +Z.
This lemma can be interpreted in our context as follows: If the label (i.e.,
random variable or its associated probability distribution more exactly) of a
subpath π ending in n FSD-dominates the label of another subpath also ending
in n, then any extension of those two subpaths will keep the direction of the
dominance.
As a direct consequence of Lemma 5.1 and FSD, we have:
Corollary 5.2 If FX ≿F SD FY , then ρ(X + Z) ≥ρ(Y + Z).
This corollary states that if a given node n has two labels, one FSD-dominating
the other, the former label can be pruned as it will lead to a higher ρ value.
Thanks to INC, the following proposition explains why it is sound to end
the algorithm as soon as node d is examined (Line 5 of Algorithm 1).
Proposition 5.3 When node d is chosen, the corresponding path is ρ-minimum.
Property INC was not considered in Parmentier et al.’s work [24]. Contrary to
their algorithm, ours can stop as soon as a path to node d is found.
In order to avoid generating too many subpaths, we use an upperbound
UB on the best ρ value known so far. When starting Algorithm 1, we can use
UB = +∞or better compute a standard shortest path and use its ρ value as an
upperbound. Then, UB can be updated each time a path to d is found (Line 9).
Besides, this algorithm can be sped up by pruning with any other known lower
bound to the ρ value (see the case study where we use the expected duration).
Note that in general, Line 5 may be hard to compute. In our case study, we
assume the time is discretized into equal-length intervals on which probability
distributions are assumed to be constant. Moreover, we also assume all distri-
butions are discretized. In the next section, we explain this in more details.
6
Case Study
We demonstrate our algorithm with ρ chosen as the conditional value-at-risk
(CVaR) with α = 90%.
This seems to be a better choice than VaR, which
was used in Chen et al.’s work [6], because it not only takes into account the
VaR threshold, but also the tail distribution. Besides, being a coherent risk
measure [1], it enjoys nicer properties than VaR. We implemented our adapted
A* algorithm in OpenTripPlanner3, an open-source platform for route planning,
which oﬀers a map-based web interface and standard shortest path algorithms.
In order to work with real traﬃc data, we estimated the dynamic random
costs from taxi trip data4 released by the New York City TLC (Taxi and Limou-
sine Commission). We ﬁrst explain how a probability distribution for the ran-
dom duration of an edge was estimated and then present an illustration of results
that can be obtained thanks to our algorithm.
3http://www.opentripplanner.org
4http://www.nyc.gov/html/tlc/html/about/trip_record_data.shtml
8

6.0.1
Data Cleaning and Estimation.
The dataset contains records of taxi trips in Manhattan from 2009 to 2015. We
only used the data from 2011 to 2015, as the data size was large and we preferred
focusing on the most recent records.
The dataset contains trip information
including pick-up/drop-oﬀlocations and pick-up/drop-oﬀtimes.
We only took
into account trips inside the Manhattan area, which represents a network of
5,111 nodes and 16,396 edges.
During the data cleaning phase, we ﬁltered
out trips that had a pick-up or drop-oﬀlocation outside Manhattan. We also
removed abnormal trips, which may be due to incorrect GPS readings.
Because the actual path of a trip and detailed times at each intersection of
a trip were not provided, we had to make two assumptions to extract random
duration Ct(e) of an edge e ∈E from the dataset:
A1 A trip follows the shortest path from origin to destination.
A2 The driver maintains the same speed along the trip.
Given the nature of the dataset, the assumptions seem reasonable enough.
A1 leads to a small overestimation of travel durations in each edge. For our risk-
averse route planning problem, overestimation is better than underestimation.
A2 is a simplifying assumption, which neglects the eﬀects of traﬃc lights, inter-
sections, turns... We do not think it has a too big impact for our application,
especially given that we have already overestimated the durations.
Based on A1, for each trip, we computed its shortest path from its origin
to its destination using standard A* in terms of duration, where the duration
of an edge (i.e., portion of a street) equals to the length (i.e., distance) of an
edge divided by the maximum speed limit allowed in that edge. Then, given
the computed shortest path π, we could generate a duration sample for each of
its edge based on A2 with ce = cπ × le
lπ where ce is the duration of an edge e of
π, cπ the total duration of the trip, le the length of edge e and lπ the length of
π.
Samples ce’s were then collected and used to estimate PCt(e). As we expect
diﬀerent traﬃc patterns on weekdays and during weekends, we divided the days
of a week into two classes: Weekdays = {Mon., Tues., Wed., Thur., Fri.} and
Weekends = {Sat., Sun.}. We divided a day into 24 bins of 1 hour.
For a
speciﬁc edge e, we obtained 24 distributions PCt(e) (one for each hour) and
assume the distribution was constant during an interval of one hour. Moreover,
we assume those distributions are discrete and deﬁned over 100 bins of 6 seconds.
Durations that exceeds 600 seconds were counted as 600 seconds.
6.0.2
Experimental Results.
With the adapted A* algorithm described before, we can ﬁnd the risk-averse
path between any pair of origin and destination. For this case study, following
Chen et al.’s work [6], we deﬁne the heuristic function used in the implemented
risk-averse path ﬁnding system as h(n) = d(n)
vmax where d(n) is the shortest length
of a path from node n to node d and vmax is the maximum travel speed in the
network.
Therefore, h(n) is the shortest possible duration to go from n to d.
Besides, it is known that CV aRα is increasing with α and CV aR0% is the
expectation. Therefore, we also maintained an expected duration of a subpath
πon and estimated a lowerbound of the expected duration of an extension of πon
to node d (as in standard A*). This lower bound can be used to prune subpaths
by comparing it with the upperbound UB.
9

(a) path at 6:00 a.m. on Wednes-
day
(b) path at 8:00 a.m. on Wednes-
day
Figure 2: Examples of risk-averse paths
To illustrate our system, we present one example where for the same pair of
origin and destination nodes, CVaR yields diﬀerent risk-averse paths depending
on the departure time. As depicted in Figure 2, at 6:00 a.m. on Wednesday,
before rush hours, the risk-averse path (with a CVaR of 24 mins) is very similar
to the shortest distance path because there is little risk of congestion. Its CVaR
can be interpreted as follows: In the worst 10% of the case, the average duration
of the trip will be 24 minutes. And, in most cases, the observed travel duration
would be much less than 24 minutes.
In contrast, at 8:00 a.m. on the same day
during rush hour, the risk-averse path is no longer the shortest distance path,
but a path (with a CVaR of 31 mins) that passes via a highway, which has less
probability of congestion. Although the risk-averse path may be a longer path
to drive, it is a less risky path in terms of CVaR.
The computation times depend on the origin and destination nodes.
By
averaging over 100 runs where those pairs where selected randomly, the average
computation time was less than one second (976.2 millisecs) using a computer

a real application, the computation time could be further improved. We expect
this could be achieved with diﬀerent optimization techniques: e.g., memoization,
better heuristics, ﬁtting duration samples to continuous distributions... As we
wanted to demonstrate the feasibility of our approach, we leave this as future
work.
7
Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed an adapted A* algorithm, which accommodates any
risk measure or decision criterion that is monotonic with ﬁrst-order stochastic
dominance, to ﬁnd a risk-averse shortest path in a transportation network with
time-dependent stochastic costs. Besides, we demonstrated our algorithm on a
case study with NYC taxi data and obtained reasonable results.
As future work, we plan to improve the computational eﬃciency of our
method, taking inspiration from the techniques developed for standard shortest
path problems [2, 7].
Moreover, we would like to test our system on more
10

accurate historical traﬃc data. Finally, we plan to extend the approach to take
into account other kinds of costs, such as power consumption.
