Nadine R¨uegg1, 2

Christoph Lassner3

Michael Black2

Konrad Schindler1

1ETH Z¨urich
2Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, T¨ubingen
3Amazon
Chained Representation Cycling: Learning to Estimate 3D Human Pose and
Shape by Cycling Between Representations
Pixels
3D
Semantic Encoding
Feedforward / Abstraction
Feedback / Verification
Latent appearance encoding
Background
Segments
Figure 1: We present a method to learn a mapping between 2D pixels and deformable 3D models in an unsupervised way.
We achieve this by using a chained cycle architecture between 2D images, a semantic encoding as latent appearance vector,
background and segments, and the parameters of a 3D body model. Our model can be used in both directions: to automatically
recover 3D parameters from 2D data and to generate renderings with varying appearance.
Abstract
The goal of many computer vision systems is to transform
image pixels into 3D representations. Recent popular mod-
els use neural networks to regress directly from pixels to
3D object parameters. Such an approach works well when
supervision is available, but in problems like human pose
and shape estimation, it is difﬁcult to obtain natural images
with 3D ground truth. To go one step further, we propose a
new architecture that facilitates unsupervised, or lightly su-
pervised, learning. The idea is to break the problem into a
series of transformations between increasingly abstract repre-
sentations. Each step involves a cycle designed to be learnable
without annotated training data, and the chain of cycles deliv-
ers the ﬁnal solution. Speciﬁcally, we use 2D body part seg-
ments as an intermediate representation that contains enough
information to be lifted to 3D, and at the same time is simple
enough to be learned in an unsupervised way. We demon-
strate the method by learning 3D human pose and shape from
un-paired and un-annotated images. We also explore varying
amounts of paired data and show that cycling greatly allevi-
ates the need for paired data. While we present results for
modeling humans, our formulation is general and can be ap-
plied to other vision problems.
Introduction
A fundamental task of any vision system, whether natural
or artiﬁcial, is to learn the relationship between the observed
“image” and the 3D scene structure. That is, the system must
transform pixels into 3D information and, conversely, take
3D hypotheses about the world and conﬁrm them in the im-
age. This can be thought of as a “cycle” from image pixels to
3D models. Learning such a cyclic mapping is challenging
and current methods assume paired training data of image
pixels and ground truth 3D. We present an approach that re-
quires little, or no, paired data.
To make the problem concrete, we consider the problem
of 3D human pose and shape estimation. This is a chal-
lenging test domain since the human body is complex, de-
formable, and articulated. Additionally, it varies dramati-
cally in appearance due to clothing, hairstyles, etc. If we can
ﬁnd a solution to learn 3D body shape and pose from pixels,
then we posit that this approach should be powerful enough
to generalize to many other scenarios.
Consider the example in Fig. 1. Here, we have three rep-
resentations of the human body: pixels, segment-based, se-
mantic 2D maps, and 3D models. The goal is to learn the
mapping from image pixels to 3D models, but we take a
path through an intermediate representation and argue that
this sequence is easier to learn. The key question is: what
properties should intermediate representations in the chain
have to facilitate learning? We suggest that a good inter-
mediate representation should be pixel-based, so that the
system can learn a per-pixel mapping from the image pix-
els to the representation. That is, our part segmentations
are not so abstract that the mapping becomes too hard
to learn in an unsupervised way. Second, the intermedi-
ate representation should support 3D inference. That is, it
arXiv:2001.01613v1  [cs.CV]  6 Jan 2020

should carry enough information that it is easy to learn the
mapping to 3D pose and shape. Previous work has shown
that it is possible to learn the mapping that “lifts” human
part segmentations to 3D human pose (Lassner et al. 2017;
Omran et al. 2018). We go further to show that we can learn
a mapping from image pixels via the intermediate represen-
tation to 3D, and vice versa, with little or no training data.
Speciﬁcally, imagine you are given a set of images, IM,
showing people with arbitrary pose and appearance. More-
over, you have access to a “high-level” 3D human body
model. Rendering photo-realistic training images from a 3D
body remains a hard problem, while it is easy to render the
body parts as a segmentation mask (see Figure 1). But we do
not know the relationship between the set of rendered seg-
mentations, PR, and the natural image set IM. Can we nev-
ertheless use the two unrelated sets of pictures to learn the
mapping from raw pixels in IM to 3D body shape and pose?
To do this we develop a novel, unsupervised multi-step cy-
cle model—a representation chain—between three different
representations: pixels, segments, and 3D parameters.
The presented approach provides a step towards unsuper-
vised learning of 3D object pose from images. A key advan-
tage of such a direction is that it theoretically allows us to
train from unlimited amounts of data, which should improve
robustness to real imaging conditions and natural variability.
To test the effectiveness of the approach, we experiment
on human pose estimation using both synthetic and real
datasets. While not yet as accurate as fully supervised meth-
ods, we show that it is feasible to learn with no paired image
and 3D data. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst approach
to tackle this problem for highly deformable 3D models
with such large variability in appearance. We also evaluate
the impact of small (i.e., practical) amounts of supervision,
which improves performance. Additionally, we show how
the model learns a representation that can be used for other
tasks like sampling synthetic bodies, transferring clothing,
and reposing. Our hope is that the framework of chained rep-
resentation cycling inspires other applications and research
into new intermediate representations.
Related Work
Domain adaptation with CycleGAN.
A number of re-
cent works employ cyclic adversarial learning to translate
between different image domains (Hoffman et al. 2017;
Zhu et al. 2017a; Lee et al. 2018; Hoshen and Wolf 2018;
Mueller et al. 2018). CyCADA (Hoffman et al. 2017), the
most relevant representative of that line of work for our task,
is trained on pairs of synthetic street scenes and rendered
images as well as unpaired real images.(Zhu et al. 2017b)
introduce BicycleGAN, a method for cross-domain image-
to-image translation that includes a latent vector to encode
appearance information, as in our work. In contrast to ours,
BicycleGAN needs supervision by paired data from the two
domains. Augmented CycleGAN (Almahairi et al. 2018) and
MUNIT (Huang et al. 2018) also advocate the use of latent
vectors to separate appearance from content. We have tested
the MUNIT architecture for our problem, but found that it
did not perform better than a vanilla CycleGAN.
3D Human Pose and Shape Estimation.
A full review
of 3D pose and shape estimation models is beyond the
scope of this paper. Recent, representative examples in-
clude (Sun et al. 2017; Tome, Russell, and Agapito 2017;
Pavlakos et al. 2017; Popa, Zanﬁr, and Sminchisescu 2017;
Pavlakos, Zhou, and Daniilidis 2018; Kanazawa et al. 2018;
Omran et al. 2018). Typically, the output is a set of key joints
linked corresponding to a stick ﬁgure. These reconstructions
often result in unrealistic 3D bone lengths. One solution is
to ﬁt a complete 3D mesh instead of just a skeleton. This
makes it possible to exploit silhouettes to better constrain
the part localization in image space (Lassner et al. 2017),
and can also include a prior that favors plausible shapes and
poses (Bogo et al. 2016), but requires a supervised method
to estimate key locations.
Even when using an elaborate body model, the intermedi-
ate 2D representation of the body is predominantly a set of
keypoints (Tome, Russell, and Agapito 2017; Martinez et al.
2017; Kanazawa et al. 2018). We deviate from that tradition
and instead model the body as a collection of 2D segments
corresponding to body parts, like in (Omran et al. 2018).
Another method in the context of unsupervised learning
is (Balakrishnan et al. 2018), which performs direct synthe-
sis without explicit 3D reconstruction. A different, more ex-
pressive approach is to model directly the volumetric body
shape, but also deviate from true human shapes (Varol et al.
2018).
Generative Person Models.
One of the ﬁrst end-to-
end trainable generative models of people was presented
in (Lassner, Pons-Moll, and Gehler 2017). (Ma et al.
2017) and (Esser, Sutter, and Ommer 2018) focus on trans-
ferring person appearance to a new pose, which we also
showcase with our model. (Ma et al. 2018) aims for a factor-
ization of foreground, background and pose, similar to our
approach, but only tackles the generative part. In contrast
to the aforementioned models, (Zanﬁr et al. 2018) takes a
high-ﬁdelity approach to human appearance transfer, com-
bining deep learning with computer graphics models. To our
best knowledge, all existing methods for appearance transfer
rely on a keypoint detector or part segments, and therefore
require either labeled data or multiple images of the same
person for training.
Semi-Supervised Approaches.
A major difﬁculty for 3D
body ﬁtting is to obtain enough ground truth 3D poses. Sev-
eral recent works therefore aim to do the 2D-to-3D lifting
with little or no 3D supervision. (Kanazawa et al. 2018) cast
the lifting problem as 3D pose regression and train it by min-
imizing a reprojection loss in 2D and an adversarial loss on
the predicted 3D pose. Related is (Kudo et al. 2018), which
follows the same general idea, but reprojects the predicted
3D joints into a number of 2D views and places the adver-
sarial loss on the resulting 2D joint conﬁgurations. (Rhodin,
Salzmann, and Fua 2018) train an encoder-decoder archi-
tecture to synthesize novel viewpoints of a person. Their
pretraining only needs multi-view data, but no annotations.
(Tulsiani, Efros, and Malik 2018) follows the same idea and
uses solely multiview consistency as a supervisory signal,
for rigid objects.

Recently, (Lorenz et al. 2019) have presented a method for
unsupervised, part-based disentangeling of object shape and
appearance, given video data or images with a plain white
background. (Jakab et al. 2018; 2019; Minderer et al. 2019)
also propose strategies for unsupervised detection of 2D hu-
man keypoints in videos. None of those approaches treats the
background explicitly, so training is only possible on videos
with almost no camera motion.
Foundations
In this section we brieﬂy introduce two prior methods used
as components of our models.
Skinned Multi-Person Linear Model (SMPL).
Our
method learns a mapping between the parameterization
space of a 3D model and 2D images of object instances of
the model. As 3D model in our work, we choose SMPL,
the “Skinned Multi-Person Linear Model” as proposed in
(Loper et al. 2015). This model establishes a pose and shape
space for human bodies in 3D space. Concretely, it is param-
eterized by the pose parameters θ ∈R72 (one 3D axis angle
rotation vector for 23 body parts plus a root rotation vector)
and the shape parameters β ∈R10 (ten PCA components
to account for variation in body shape). The result of posing
and shaping SMPL is a 6890 vertex mesh with 10 faces.
Neural Body Fitting (NBF).
NBF describes an approach
for supervised 3D human pose estimation (Omran et al.
2018). It uses (different) body part segments as an intermedi-
ate representation and maps these segments to a parameteri-
zation of SMPL. This mapping is performed using a neural
network that takes a 224×224×3 color coded segmentation
map as input and predicts the full SMPL parameters. This
module can be treated as a black box for our approach, and
we use it to implement the translation between intermediate
representation and 3D space, with changes only to input and
output encoding and losses.
Approach
We establish a connection between the 2D and 3D repre-
sentations of objects, and present a novel, unsupervised ap-
proach for mapping 3D objects to images and back. We do
note that for many object types 3D models exist, or can be
created from existing 3D data in an automated manner. This
includes objects with limited shape variability and articula-
tion (e.g., cars, furniture), but more recently also common
animals (Zufﬁet al. 2017). As we aim to handle articulated
pose, including 3D orientation and translation, the projected
images can vary strongly in appearance. To still be able to
use unsupervised training, we need to reduce the complex-
ity of the task as much as possible. An ideal intermediate
representation would describe the image and, at the same
time, reduce the complexity of the following, chained step.
We introduce part segments as this main, intermediate rep-
resentation to connect the two domains. With them, we can
“factorize” an image into background, a segment-based de-
scription of object pose and shape, and residual appearance.
With this representation, (1) it is trivial to extract the back-
ground; (2) object pose and shape are encoded more richly
than by keypoints (Omran et al. 2018) for the next step; and
(3) residual appearance reduces to precisely the information
needed to “paint” a person with known segmentation. Fur-
thermore, the part segments reside in the same domain as
images: the 2D plane. They are spatially related to the im-
age pixels and are therefore well-predictable by a CNN.
Domains
For clarity we refer to the 2D image space as do-
main IM (image), to the intermediate representation as do-
main PR (proxy), and to the observed 3D world as do-
main TR (target). Domain IM consists of images of the ob-
ject class of interest, here people. Domain TR is represented
with a fully parameterized, deformable 3D model of that
class. For our scenario we use the SMPL body model (Loper
et al. 2015) with pose and body shape parameters. Domain
PR factors the image space into a background, explicit part
segments and a latent appearance code. Technically, we
store this information as (1) a 4-channel image that contains
in the ﬁrst three channels the natural image of the back-
ground region overlayed by a colour-coded segment map
of the foreground (with arbitrary, well-separated colours)
as well as in channel four a binary foreground-background
mask and (2) a vector z that encodes appearance.
Cycle IM-PR
The cycle IM-PR consists of a parsing GAN model, trans-
lating images to part segments, background and appearance,
and a generative GAN model to translate this intermediate
representation to images. We base the design of this loop on
the CycleGAN architecture (Zhu et al. 2017a).
CycleGANs.
are a model family designed such that a map-
ping from one image domain A to another image domain B
can be found in an unsupervised way. The mappings G :
A →B and F : B →A are learned using two types of
loss functions: (i) Adversarial losses encourage images from
G(A) to be indistinguishable from images sampled from
domain B. Similarly, an adversarial loss enforces match-
ing distributions for F(B) and domain A. (ii) Cycle con-
sistency losses enforce F(G(A)) ≈A and G(F(B)) ≈B.
Through the combination of the two losses, it is possible to
sidestep annotations altogether: the adversarial losses ensure
that “translated” representations match the target domain,
and the consistency losses enforce a consistent mapping be-
tween domains. In the following, we extend this basic Cy-
cleGAN model for our purpose, to enforce the intended fac-
torization of images from IM in PR.
A Complete Segmentation Cycle.
We develop a cycle
between real-world images and the combination of back-
ground, part segments and residual appearance. In contrast
to traditional image translation, we need multiple compo-
nents in PR to capture all relevant content of natural images
in IM. Only then we can establish a full translation cycle
without loss of information.
Generator from IM to PR. The structure of the genera-
tor that maps an image from domain IM to domain PR is
shown in Fig. 2. The image is encoded by convolutional lay-
ers and processed by a ResNet (He et al. 2016). The output

Figure 2: The mapping function from IM to PR. We use
a classical encoding structure, followed by (1) a fully con-
nected layer predicting mean and variance of the residual
appearance as well as (2) a set of deconvolutions to produce
a part segmentation map in the original resolution.
Figure 3: The mapping function from domain PR to do-
main IM. The part segment image and the background are
split and the part segments are used together with the resid-
ual appearance encoding to produce the object image before
fusing it with the background.
is processed by several fractionally strided convolutions to
produce a segmentation and background map at input reso-
lution. In the ﬁrst three channels, this map contains the color
coded semantic segments of the person where applicable
and the background colors where not. In the fourth channel,
it contains a semantic segmentation with solely foreground
and background labels. In a second branch, we use a fully
connected layer to predict the mean and variance of the a
latent person appearance encoding vector. This parameteri-
zation is inspired by variational autoencoders (Kingma and
Welling 2013) and enables us to sample person appearance
vectors for the cycle part PR-IM at test time. This allows us
to fully sample representation for PR randomly.
Generator from PR to IM. The cycle part to generate an
image from its semantic description receives as input a back-
ground image, the part segment image and a vector z. The
segments together with the z vector contain all information
needed to generate an image of a human in the desired pose
and appearance. As illustrated in Fig. 3, z is tiled and con-
catenated with a resized version of the part segmentation
map. We use a ResNet (He et al. 2016) followed by fraction-
ally strided convolutions to produce an image in the original
size. The fusion with the background is guided by the mask
from domain PR.
All design choices for building the generators are driven
by two needs: to be able to randomly sample instances in
both domains and to create a representation in domain PR
that is helpful for the following chain link to domain TR,
but still ‘complete’ in the sense that it contains enough in-
formation to generate an example for domain IM.
Mitigating Information Hiding. We ﬁnd that, when trans-
lating across domains with strongly differing appearance,
models tend to “hide” texture information by reducing its
contrast. This happens in subtle ways even when translating
between natural image domains.
Whereas information hiding in regular CycleGANs is
mainly a cosmetic problem, it is fundamentally problem-
atic in our setting: the network can hide appearance in the
part segments instead of using the vector z to encode it. This
(1) leads to polluted silhouettes with noisy segment informa-
tion and (2) the network becomes agnostic to changes in z.
The ability to sample different appearance cues is important,
because it enables us to generate different images for the cy-
cle PR-IM-PR-(TR). Hence, we take several steps to pre-
vent the network from hiding appearance in the segmenta-
tions: ﬁrst, we suppress residual color variations within each
predicted part by ﬂooding it with the assigned part color.
Second, in the cycle IM-PR-IM, both, the originally pre-
dicted image and the thresholded and inpainted image are
passed to the transformation PR-IM.
The Leap to 3D
The second part of the chained model is trained to bridge the
domains PR and TR, i.e., to match 3D object parameters and
part segment maps. Whereas the link TR-PR is implemented
as rendering of a segment color-coded SMPL mesh, we im-
plement the link PR-TR as an adaptation of neural body ﬁt-
ting (NBF (Omran et al. 2018)), with the part segments in
front of a neutral background as input. Global translation,
rotation and shape parameters are estimated in addition to
one rotation matrix per joint. In order to handle the ambi-
guity between model size and camera viewpoint, we height-
normalize our 3D model templates and use depth as the only
way to inﬂuence the size of the depicted model.
The PR-TR part of our model is ﬁrst trained on sampled
pairs of 3D parameters and rendered part segment maps.
However, the sampled part segmentation maps in PR are
noise-free, as opposed to the ones produced by our encoder
IM-PR. Still, we can train our full network by using the
chain (TR-)PR-IM-PR-TR in an unsupervised way and en-
force a “reconstruction loss” for the 3D model parameters.
For this extended cycle PR-IM-PR-TR, we use all loss
terms for the IM-PR cycle and an additional term for the
reconstruction of 3D parameters. The initial z for the tran-
sition PR-IM is not sampled randomly, but copied from a
different input image picked at random, to ensure as realis-
tic person appearance as possible. Furthermore, we stop the
3D reconstruction loss gradients at domain IM, such that
the network is not encouraged to paint silhouette informa-
tion into images from domain IM.
Experiments
In the following, we ﬁrst present a detailed evaluation on the
synthetic SURREAL (Varol et al. 2017) dataset and discuss
in a second part results on images of real people. Those im-
ages come from the Human3.6M (Ionescu et al. 2014) and
Penn Action (Zhang, Zhu, and Derpanis 2013) datasets.

Figure 4: Qualitative results of our unsupervised model on the SURREAL dataset (Varol et al. 2017). Per example, per
column: input image, predicted segments, ﬁtted 3D body. Even though many body ﬁts are correct w.r.t. the segmentation, the
model is susceptible to left-right swaps. The overall body shape is typically well-explained.
Results on the SURREAL Dataset
SURREAL contains images of people rendered with 772
clothing textures and 193 CAESAR dataset textures (Robi-
nette, Daanen, and Paquet 1999). Corresponding annota-
tions, including pose, depth maps and segmentation masks
are provided. To create a realistic scenario, we process the
training dataset such that we have the two unpaired sets
of images, strictly separated by motion sequence+rotation.
From one set we draw images for domain IM, from the other
poses for domain PR. First, our method is evaluated in terms
of semantic body part segmentation and 3D pose error. Sec-
ond, we provide qualitative ﬁtting results and show exam-
ples for appearance transfer and body shape estimation.
Quantitative Results.
To our knowledge there are few dif-
ferent papers that present pose estimation results on SUR-
REAL, all using full supervision (Tung et al. 2017; Varol et
al. 2017; 2018; Madadi, Bertiche, and Escalera 2018). As
a connecting baseline we run a fully supervised training of
our model. Note, though, as our version of the dataset is split
to be unpaired, we use only half as much data for training.
Moreover, the chained architecture is not ideal for the fully
supervised setting, due to less direct gradient propagation.
We ﬁrst evaluate the semantic segmentation results of our
model, which correspond to the results from the cycle part
IM-PR. Tab. 1 shows results for segmentation into 14 parts
as well as 3D pose estimation. (Madadi, Bertiche, and Es-
calera 2018) and (Varol et al. 2018) list the mean per joint
position error (MPJPE) in millimeter (mm) after the po-
sitions are subtracted from the root joint. We additionally
provide the translation normalized root mean squared error
(t-RMSE). Even though we use a smaller training set and
the chained model is not designed for supervised learning,
its segmentation results are on par with (Varol et al. 2017)
and (Varol et al. 2018), pose and shape reconstructions are
slightly worse.
Unsupervised and Semi-Supervised Training. We now
turn to the unsupervised setting. As an ablation study, we
include a semi-supervised variant with small amounts of su-
pervision added. The results can be found in Tab. 2. We used
a fully unsupervised trained model for initialization and then
ran training using an L2 loss for the part segment maps of
every k-th example (k ∈{500, 200, 100}). The 1% data split
contains the 0.5% as well as 0.2% data splits completely. For
evaluation, we used the metrics:
Seg. (IoU)
t-RMSE
MPJPE
SURREAL (Varol et al. 2017)
0.69
-
-
BodyNet (Varol et al. 2018)
0.69
-
40.8
SMPLR (Madadi, Bertiche, and Escalera 2018)
-
-
55.8
Ours (fully supervised)
0.69
85.0
69.5
Ours (unsupervised)
0.36
204.0
167.3
Table 1: Quantitative comparison with supervised methods.
We only use half of the dataset for supervised training and
still manage to match the performance of SURREAL and
BodyNet models in segmentation.
no sup.
supervision
-
0.2%
0.5%
1%
100%
segmen-
tation
14seg
0.364
0.488
0.563
0.622
0.688
4seg
0.713
0.791
0.755
0.777
0.779
1seg
0.887
0.924
0.923
0.932
0.943
3D error
(normal)
RMSE
252.90
182.95
161.74
149.72
129.96
t-RMSE
204.29
141.90
113.79
100.71
84.97
tr-RMSE
135.59
104.18
93.80
84.31
71.90
3D error
(best of
4 swaps)
RMSE
175.81
145.88
142.45
135.47
121.75
t-RMSE
125.88
104.28
99.69
90.84
81.51
tr-RMSE
103.18
86.00
83.89
77.03
69.29
Table 2: Unsupervised and semi-supervised evaluation re-
sults. Ablation study for varying amounts of supervision
(0%, 0.2%, 0.5%, 1% and 100%).
Segmentation. We provide intersection over union (IoU)
scores for the predicted segmentation masks, ignoring the
dominant background category. We additionally provide
segmentation results after combining segments, resulting in
a total of 14, 4 or 1 segment. 4seg corresponds to the seg-
ments d = {arms, legs, upper body, head}, while 1seg
corresponds to foreground-background segmentation.
3D Error (normal). We report the root mean square error
(RMSE) between predicted and ground truth 3D SMPL joint
locations. Furthermore, we calculate the RMSE with cor-
rected translation (t-RMSE) and corrected translation as well
as rotation (tr-RMSE). tr-RMSE is equal to the pose error
calculated after a Procrustes matching.
3D Error (best of 4 swaps). To analyze the effect of the well-
known left-right swapping ambiguity, we provide this addi-
tional score. To calculate it, we swap the left and right arms,
respectively legs, in the segmentation; ﬁt the 3D model for
each of the four possible combinations; and use the best ﬁt.

Figure 5: 3D pose and shape predictions of our unsupervised
model for people with strongly varying body shape.
Discussion. We ﬁnd that the fully unsupervised learning of
segments as well as 3D ﬁts works surprisingly well, but is
often subject to left-right ambiguities. A main source of in-
formation for the model in the unsupervised case is the outer
silhouette of the person. Since left-right swaps preserve the
outer silhouette, it is hard for the model to identify these
swapping errors. This becomes obvious when comparing,
e.g., t-RMSE (best of 4) unsupervised with the t-RMSE (nor-
mal) with 100% supervision: the unsupervised model learns
to estimate body pose and shape nearly as as well as in the
supervised case, but the left-right swaps remain a hurdle. Im-
portantly, we ﬁnd that adding very little supervision can give
just the right hints to overcome this hurdle. When adding
even just 1% of supervision, the t-RMSE (normal) is halved.
Also, with 1% supervision the segmentation (14 segments)
reaches 90% of the fully supervised performance.
Qualitative Results.
Our representation bridges all three
domains IM, PR and TR. We show examples for differ-
ent modes of operation, (1) 3D ﬁts from images (the direc-
tion IM-TR); and (2) appearance transfer (the direction TR-
IM). All results provided in this section are obtained with
unsupervised training on the SURREAL dataset.
From IM to TR – 3D Fits and Segments. Randomly se-
lected results of the unsupervised, chained cycle model are
shown in Fig. 4. The explanation of the human silhouette
is usually successful, however the model is susceptible to
left-right swaps that have a strong inﬂuence on the 3D ﬁt,
as discussed above. Fig. 5 shows 3D predictions for people
with varying body shape. The silhouette provides a strong
signal to estimate body shape from all directions. This en-
ables the model to predict shape parameters faithfully, even
without any supervision.
From TR to IM – Appearance Transfer. We showcase a
different mode of operation for our model and transfer the
appearance between people in Fig. 6. Appearance z is pre-
dicted for each of the input images on the left. It is trans-
ferred to another image as well as multiple random 3D con-
ﬁgurations. The results are stable for a ﬁxed vector z, which
indicates that the model learns to encode appearance and
does not simply hide cues in the part segmentation map. We
are able to transfer appearance to any 3D conﬁguration and
obtain good results, for varying poses and body shapes. The
ability to generate people in previously unseen poses is im-
portant for the cycle IM-PR to work.
Figure 6: Example results for appearance transfer. 1st col-
umn: input images. 2nd column: appearance transfer to a
new image. The new image is visible in the top row, the al-
tered appearance below. Remaining columns: the top row
shows plain SMPL instance, below are results of mapping
TR-IM with the extracted appearance.
IoU, 14 Seg.
IoU, 4 Seg.
IoU, 1 Seg.
tr-MPJPE
(Ramakrishna, Kanade, and Sheikh 2012)*
-
-
-
157.3
SMPLify (Bogo et al. 2016)*
-
-
-
82.3
NBF (Omran et al. 2018)*
-
-
-
59.9
HMR (Kanazawa et al. 2018)*
-
-
-
56.8
Ours (27 labeled images)
0.292
0.567
0.797
142.2
Ours (66 labeled images)
0.326
0.568
0.800
140.1
Table 3: Results on the H36M dataset (Ionescu et al. 2014).
IoU for predicted body part segments (14 parts, 4 parts and
fg/bg) and 3D error (mean per joint reprojection error after
translation and rotation alignment) for varying amounts of
supervision. *These results are computed on the full H36M
test set and trained with supervision. We provide them to
give an impression of the current supervised state of the art.
Results on Real Images
Results on the H36M Dataset.
H36M is a dataset
recorded in a lab setting with 3D ground truth available
through motion capture data. We initialize with our model
from the unsupervised training on the SURREAL dataset
and adapt it to H36M with minimal supervision (only 27
and 66 labeled images) to limit the impact of the static back-
ground on our discriminator. During training, we sample
poses for domain PR from the same Gaussian mixture prior
as in (Lassner et al. 2017). Background images are taken
from H36M directly. The input image crops are generated
following the procedure in (Omran et al. 2018). We perform
data augmentation by rotating, mirroring and rescaling the
images. For the few labeled images, we extend the augmen-
tation by pasting the segmented persons in front of varying
backgrounds. We use subject 1 as a held-out test subject and
subjects 5, 6, 7 and 8 as training subjects.
Tab. 3 shows quantitative results. We list results from su-
pervised methods for comparison. Notice that they are not
strictly comparable, as the mean per joint reprojection error
after translation and rotation alignment (tr-MPJPE) is calcu-
lated on H36M joints instead of SMPL joints and a different
training / test split is used. For our method, left-right swaps
are a major obstacle. However, the tr-MPJPE shows that
the rough pose of the person is extracted faithfully. Under-

Figure 7: Random examples of estimated 3D pose and shape on the H36M dataset (Ionescu et al. 2014). These results are
generated by a model that uses partial supervision with only 66 labeled images.
Figure 8: Qualitative results of our unsupervised model on in-the-wild images (Zhang, Zhu, and Derpanis 2013). Per example,
per column: input image, predicted segments, ﬁtted 3D body.
represented poses like sitting strongly impact the average er-
ror. In Fig. 7, we provide randomly picked qualitative results
to give a direct impression of the predictions.
Qualitative Results on In-The-Wild Images.
H3.6M is
a studio dataset, thus the variety of person appearances and
backgrounds is very limited. To show that our model can
be used on in-the-wild images, we provide additional qual-
itative results for less constrained images. We ﬁne-tune the
unsupervised SURREAL model on the Penn Action train-
ing set (Zhang, Zhu, and Derpanis 2013). The dataset pro-
vides bounding boxes; we use the regions around the people
to create background samples for domain PR. 3D pose and
shape are sampled from the same distribution as for SUR-
REAL. Even though Penn Action is a video dataset, we only
train on individual, unpaired images. Fig. 8 shows example
results. This highlights that our model does not over-ﬁt to
characteristics of the synthetic SURREAL images, but does
learn to represent humans and recognize them in images.
Conclusion
The 2D-3D generation-parsing cycle is ubiquitous in vision
systems. In this paper we have investigated a novel model
that aims to capture the entire cycle and use its structure
to enable unsupervised learning of the underlying relation-
ships. For this purpose, we have developed a chain of cycles
that link representations at different levels of abstraction. We
demonstrate the feasibility of representation cycling, which
we think will be applicable to a variety of problems. In this
work we have focused on learning the extraction and gener-
ation of human bodies and, to our knowledge, are the ﬁrst
to show entirely unsupervised results on this problem. The
complexity of the human body, self-occlusion, and varying
appearance all make this problem challenging, even with
paired training data. So why attack such a hard problem?
While getting supervised data for 3D human pose and shape
is still possible, it is much harder for other object classes
like animals. Our model pushes how far we can go without
paired data. It does not yet match state-of-the-art results on
human pose benchmarks—getting there will likely require
an engineering effort that supervised models already have
behind them. Nonetheless, we see considerable potential in
the longer term. Approaches that learn on unlabeled data en-
able us to exploit almost unlimited amounts of data and thus
have the potential to yield more robust models. Furthermore,
an unsupervised approach can directly be applied to new ob-
ject categories, avoiding repeating labeling efforts.
Aknowledgements. This research was supported by the
Max Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems. MJB has re-
ceived research gift funds from Intel, NVIDIA, Adobe, Face-
book, and Amazon. While MJB is a part-time employee of
Amazon, this research was performed solely at MPI.
