Meta-Learning Conjugate Priors for
Few-Shot Bayesian Optimization
Ruduan B.F. Plug

Leiden Institute of Advanced Computer Science
Leiden University
(Dated: 03 January 2020)
Abstract
Bayesian Optimization is methodology used in statistical modelling that utilizes a
Gaussian process prior distribution to iteratively update a posterior distribution towards
the true distribution of the data. Finding unbiased informative priors to sample from is
challenging and can greatly inﬂuence the outcome on the posterior distribution if only
few data are available.
In this paper we propose a novel approach to utilize meta-
learning to automate the estimation of informative conjugate prior distributions given a
distribution class. From this process we generate priors that require only few data to
estimate the shape parameters of the original distribution of the data.
1.
Introduction
Meta-Learners such as those proposed by Finn.
et al.
[1] and Nichol & Schulman [2] provide
meta-algorithms to estimate optimized initializa-
tion weights parameters of gradient-descent based
learning algorithms. These optimizations are per-
formed by ameliorating these initialization param-
eters on sample distributions of task classes, af-
ter which the distribution of samples from a new
task of the same class can be estimated using only
few data points.
We can provide accurate esti-
mates given the task is similar, as generalization
of learned meta-initialization weights improve with
task-similarity [3].
In this paper we utilize the process of meta-
learning on posterior statistical distributions of
randomly generated data to estimate an informa-
tive conjugate prior. We cover numeric data under
the Gaussian distributions, for which we will meta-
learn a model that we hypothesize can generalize
well over any parametric conﬁguration of these dis-
tributions. Typically, it is challenging to ﬁnd unbi-
ased informative priors for Bayesian optimization
tasks [4].
We hypothesize that the estimated pa-
rameters of these meta-learned models form infor-
mative priors for these distributions [5], which has
applications in the Bayes by Backpropagation tech-
nique in Bayesian Optimization [6].
2.
Related Work
Previous study was done in the effects of
weight initializations on the outcome of networks
optimized through gradient descent, such as the
early work by Drago & Ridella on statistical meth-
ods to optimize weight initialization [7], the gen-
eralized analysis of initialization and optimization
of MLPs by Weymaere & Martens [8] and more re-
cently the analysis of the importance of weight ini-
tialization and learning momentum on deep learn-
ing models by Sutskever & Martens et al.
A methodology developed for the optimiza-
tion of initialization weights as a method of meta-
learning was made by Finn et al.
in the form of
Model-Agnostic Meta Learning [1]. Later this ap-
proach was approximated with a more efﬁcient al-
gorithm Reptile by Nichol & Schulman [2] which
has seen applications in Generative Adverserial
Networks [9] and Reinforcement Learning [10].
The methodology we propose in this paper
builds upon the work in Amortized Bayesian Meta-
Learning by Ravi & Beatson [5], in which a method
is introduced to approximate the hierarchical vari-
ation across task classes to estimate prior dis-
tributions.
Other applications of meta-learning
in Bayesian statistics include prior estimation for
Bayesian regression by Harrison et al. [11] and
1
arXiv:2101.00729v1  [cs.LG]  3 Jan 2021

using
meta-learned
ensemble
models
for
Bayesian optimization methods [12].
3.
Methods
In this paper we implement a parallelized ver-
sion of the scalable Reptile algorithm by Nichol &
Schulman using Torch [13]. By doing so, we can
process a very large amount of batch evaluations
with the Reptile meta-learner while keeping com-
putational time limited. Below in Algorithm 1 we
give a general overview of the algorithm we will
use to show how we update the weight initializa-
tion parameters θ.
Algorithm 1: Parallel Batched Reptile [2]
Randomly Initialize Weight Parameters θ;
for Iteration = 1, 2, ... do
Sample Task Batch τ1, τ2, ...τn;
for Task = τ1, τ2, ...τn do
Wi = SGD(Lτi, θ, k);
end
θ ←θ + α 1
k
Pn
i=1(Wi −θ) ;
end
Here tasks τ1, τ2, ...τn are randomly sampled
task from our main task class T . We utilize Torch
to perform the SGD step, where we calculate the
weights after one update over the task batch in par-
allel using a Torch module. From these candidate
weights φi, we calculate the linear loss gradients
δℓby subtracting these candidate weight sets from
the original weights. The mean of all the loss gra-
dients multiplied by the learning rate gives us the
ﬁnal gradient for the meta-learning step resulting
in parameters θt+1 as illustrated in Figure 1.
By performing the k-batched optimizations,
we optimize the initialization weights towards the
mean of k sampling distributions of the task class.
As evidenced in Bronskill et al. [14], batch updat-
ing provide a robust method even with a simple
linear normalization scheme.
Doing so allows us
to perform meta-learning towards different task-
speciﬁc goals in parallel limited to a single itera-
tion as we are not estimating computationally ex-
pensive n-th order derivatives as would be done in
the methodology by Finn. et al. [1].
Figure. 1: Schema for Batched Meta-Learning
Initialization θ and Candidate φ over Tasks τ
Pre-training the initialization parameters of a
neural network through Meta-Learning allows for
convergence using signiﬁcantly less data points on
MLP based models. The paper on provable guar-
antees for gradient-based meta-learning by Kho-
dak et al. [3] further argues that generalization of
the Meta-Learned parameters improve with task-
similarity.
We hypothesize that using this tech-
nique we can provide an automated methodology
to transform these initialization weights into sam-
pling probability distributions, which we can apply
in the sampling procedure of Bayesian Optimiza-
tion.
Expanding upon the work of Snoek et al. [15]
and Shahriari et al. [16] we explore the possibil-
ity to generate conjugate prior distributions for the
initial sampling to improve convergence using lit-
tle samples, which we will consider as Few-Shot
Bayesian Optimization. This approach is advanta-
geous because it allows us to estimate the para-
metric conﬁguration to ﬁt an unknown distribution
towards a chosen conjugate without requiring eval-
uation of sample point derivatives [17] as would be
required in gradient-based optimization strategies
that are typically used in machine learning.
Algorithm 2: Bayesian Optimisation
Observe Sampling Function f(x) and Boundary X ;
for Iteration = 1, 2, ... do
Sample Prior Distribution D;
Acquisition xi+1 = arg max
X
α(x|Di);
Estimate Objective yi+1 ∼N(f(xi+1), ν) ;
Augment Di+1 = {Di ∪(xi+1, yi+1)} ;
end
2

In Algorithm 2 we present a general overview
of the Bayesian Optimization process.
Note here
that the sampling function f(x) provides an esti-
mate for yi with error term as we consider the
original distribution unknown. This process is illus-
trated in Figure 2, where we use an uninformative
prior and have updated the Gaussian distribution
with two samples.
Figure. 2: Bayesian Optimization from zero prior after
two samples in boundary X = [0,5]
For the Bayesian Optimizer we use the Gaus-
sian Process Model as a non-parametric surrogate
model. This model forms a mapping of boundary
set X as f : X →R such that ﬁnite set {x ∈X}n
forms a Rn multivariate Gaussian Distribution. To
guide the exploration of the sample space X us-
ing the sampling function, an acquisition functions
α that is guided by the Gaussian Process mean
and variance over prior D.
A typical method is
to use maximum likelihood on the conjugate of the
new sample and the prior distribution L(x|D) [18],
which has an analytic solution for Gaussian Pro-
cesses of standard normals of shape Φ(z) [15]:
α(x|D) = Φ(γ(x, D))
(1)
Which is distributed in R2 as:
γ(x, D) = f(arg minx f(D)) −µ(D ∪(x, y))
νσ(D ∪(x, y))
(2)
Which gives the acquisition expectation:
E(α(x|D)) =σ(D ∪(x, y)) (γ(x, D)Φ(γ(x, D)))
+ N(γ, ν)
(3)
Since we wish to utilize a complex prior distri-
bution with θ parameters as derived from our meta-
learned model, using the analytic solution over Rn
is infeasible. Instead, we will augment our estimate
with the squared exponential kernel K2, which al-
lows us to place strong assumptions on the co-
variance of our parametric space θ while evaluat-
ing new samples x and estimates ˆx.
K2(x, ˆx) = θ0 exp

−1
2κ(x, ˆx)

(4)
κ(x, ˆx) =
Pn
i=1 (xi −ˆxi)2
θ2
i
(5)
Finally, integrating allows us to evaluate monte
carlo samples over the prior distribution using our
meta-learned θ to ﬁnd the most likely sampling can-
didate estimate in the parametric space for our
model.
ˆα(x|D) =
Z
α(x|θ)p(θ|x) dθ
(6)
Note that now for our point acquisition using
our meta-learned prior, the likelihood to draw new
sample x depends entirely on our θ parameters on
a ﬁnite interval, which we can evaluate by direct
numerical optimization [19].
4.
Experiment
Our objective is to perform meta-learning on
the general task structure of Gaussian distribu-
tions by generating a large amount of distributions
with randomly initialized parameters γ and ν in our
boundary X to meta-learn a new set of parameters
θ.
By using the acquisition estimate proposed in
Equation 6 we can then transform θ into a density
function over x from which we can estimate the
sampling likelihood distribution over our prior dis-
tribution D to optimize our posterior distribution in
our Bayesian optimization algorithm.
Ultimately, we seek to experiment whether us-
ing this methodology can provide improvements
in the error estimate of the Bayesian optimization
process when only using k samples, as we deﬁned
as k-shot Bayesian optimization.
3

As discussed previously, to facilitate our exper-
iments we have implemented a parallelized version
of the Reptile meta-learner. First, let us discuss the
hyper parameters we will use for our meta-learning
process, which are listed below in table I.
Parameter
Value
Parameter
Value
Inner Step Size
0.02
Meta Batch Size
10
Inner Batch Size 5
Model Size
64
Outer Step Size
0.1
Evaluation Iterations
32
Outer Iterations 10,000
Evaluation Batch Size 10
Table. I: Torch Reptile Hyper Parameters
For most of the parameters, such as the model
and batch sizes we follow the previous suggestions
by Nichol & Schulman [2]. We do however opt for
a lower learning rate and a lower amount of itera-
tions due to the task class we study being less com-
plex than studied by Nichol, but having more vari-
ance in the parametric speciﬁcations, which means
it is more beneﬁcial for us to repeat the prior ap-
proximation as a monte carlo process as discussed
in the previous section. The parameters of our task
are listed in Table II.
Parameter
Value
Parameter
Value
Task
Gaussian Sample Radius
4
Sample Count 100,000
Evaluation Range [1,10]
Table. II: Task Parameters
Note that here the evaluation range is the
range of k we evaluate for our k-shot evaluation of
our model. The sample radius deﬁnes our bound-
ary X and the sample count gives our monte carlo
sample size to estimate the acquisition based on
our estimated model parameters θ.
As
the
Guassian
process
model
is
a
non-
parametric surrogate model for our distribution,
the only input we give it is our acquisition function
based on our prior probability densities - estimated
by our θ.
We will determine if there are signiﬁ-
cant differences in the performance between us-
ing these priors compared to non-informative con-
jugate priors such as the standard normal distri-
bution and uniform distributions when no data has
been evaluated by the model. We hypothesize that
by meta-learning the prior on the task speciﬁca-
tion, we will ﬁnd convergence for very low k sam-
ples on the meta-learned conjugate priors.
5.
Results
Training our meta-learner on a 1 →64 →64 →
1 fully connected model as proposed by Nichol et al.
[2] gives us 4 224 trainable parameters. First, train-
ing the general task structure gives us probability
distributions for the mean value such as illustrated
below in Figure 3.
Figure. 3: Estimated Prior Distribution compared to
the mean of all sampled Tasks
These θ prior distributions on boundary X are
based on the mean evaluation of all the batches
of different task parameterizations, next we ap-
ply these to Bayesian Optimization to determine
whether these generalize well over these task
structures.
First we evaluate Bayesian Optimiza-
tion using a uniformally distributed Gaussian prior
optimized using the K2 acquisition kernel.
Figure. 4: Initial Surrogate and Acquisition after a
single sample from uniform prior distribution
4

Figure. 5: Final Surrogate and Acquisition after ten
samples from uniform prior using K2 acquisition kernel
In Figure 4 and 5 are shown both the Gaus-
sian surrogate function f and the acquisition α af-
ter 1 · · · 10 samples using a uniform prior.
Next,
we proceed with the same process using our meta-
learned prior, which is shown in ﬁgures 6 and 7 and
full results are provided in Table III.
k
MSE
Uniform
MSE
Meta
k
MSE
Uniform
MSE
Meta
1
1.3048
3.1180e-04
6
0.2240
7.5502e-05
2
0.6667
2.1578e-04
7
0.2174
5.4062e-05
3
0.4238
1.2765e-04
8
0.1597
4.0239e-05
4
0.3412
1.4147e-04
9
0.1670
2.9388e-05
5
0.24153
5.8190e-05 10
0.1204
2.7168e-05
Table. III: MSE over evaluations of Bayesian
Optimization on Uniform and Meta-Learned Priors
Figure. 6: Initial Surrogate and Acquisition after a
single sample from our meta-learned prior distribution
Figure. 7: Final Surrogate and Acquisition after ten
samples from meta prior using K2 acquisition kernel
6.
Discussion
From the results in the previous section we in-
fer a noticeable difference in performance between
initializing Bayesian optimization with a uniform
or standard normal conjugate prior compared to
the meta-learned conjugate prior. Using the meta-
learned prior provides noticeably better estimates
on low k for k-shot optimization, providing better
estimates with only a single sample illustrated in
the results Table III and in Figure 6 than using a
uniform distribution with ten samples as illustrated
in Figure 5.
We also note that, as expected, with a higher
sample count k in our evaluation the MSE over
our evaluation batches decreases.
This decrease
in MSE is exponential with respect to k, which we
show in the log-scale plot in Figure 8.
Figure. 8: MSE on the evaluation set for Uniform and
Meta-Learned priors show linearity with k on a log scale
5

7.
Conclusion
From the results we have discussed, we can in-
deed infer that meta-learning with reptile can pro-
vide informative conjugate priors when used for
bayesian optimization.
As evidenced by Table III
this difference is signiﬁcant when compared to the
uniform baseline used in Gaussian process opti-
mization when the task class is known.
Concluding, meta-learning is not only a proven
technique to optimize the initialization parameters
for gradient-descent based methods, but the multi-
variate distribution mapped by the optimized pa-
rameters also provide a promising technique to
map priors to multivariate gaussian distributions
using the integration technique we have discussed
in the methods section. Using even as little as a sin-
gle sample point for a relatively simple multivariate
distribution task can give us posterior distributions
that are quite close to the true distribution.
8.
Further Work
Moving forward, we may be able to experiment
to use this technique towards non-conjugate pri-
ors and non-standard distributions. The most likely
candidate is a multivariate beta distribution, which
is a viable Bayesian prior for a large variety of tasks
such as image processing proposed by Akhtar et al.
[20], sparse learning as shown by Yuan et al. [21]
and multistate events covered by Kim et al. [22].
Comparing different meta-learning techniques
for optimizing the priors in Bayesian optimization
or varying the prior surrogate from GP may provide
novel results as illustrated by Wu [23] comparing
Bayesian meta-learning algorithms.
