arXiv:1102.5185v1  [cs.CL]  25 Feb 2011
Universal Higher Order Grammar
Victor Gluzberg
HOLTRAN Technology Ltd

Abstract
We examine the class of languages that can be deﬁned entirely in terms
of provability in an extension of the sorted type theory (Tyn) by embedding
the logic of phonologies, without introduction of special types for syntactic
entities. This class is proven to precisely coincide with the class of logically
closed languages that may be thought of as functions from expressions to sets
of logically equivalent Tyn terms. For a speciﬁc sub-class of logically closed
languages that are described by ﬁnite sets of rules or rule schemata, we ﬁnd
eﬀective procedures for building a compact Tyn representation, involving
a ﬁnite number of axioms or axiom schemata. The proposed formalism is
characterized by some useful features unavailable in a two-component archi-
tecture of a language model. A further specialization and extension of the
formalism with a context type enable eﬀective account of intensional and
dynamic semantics.
1
Introduction
Traditionally higher-order logic representation of natural language semantics
(Thomason, 1974) had to be combined with an additional formalism to de-
scribe a syntactic structure of a language and a mapping between the two.
This two-component architecture of a language model has not essentially
changed with the invention and further rapid development of type-logical
grammar (Lambek, 1958; Blackburn et al., 1997), i.e. a parallel logical for-
malism to describe a syntactic structure: in spite of the very close and deep
correspondence between the two logics, their internal languages and seman-
tics remain diﬀerent.
Several theoretical, methodological and technological issues are rooted
in the two-component architecture of a language model, out of which it is
important to mention here the following.
1

1. A language in such a model cannot express anything about another
language of the same model nor, of course, about itself. This kind of
expressiveness is, however, one of the characteristic capabilities of a
natural language.
2. Lack of lexical robustness. As the semantic interpretation of a sen-
tence in the two-component language model can be composed only
from semantic interpretations of all its constituents, such a model fails
to interpret an entire sentence if it contains even a single unrecognized
(new) word. Some ad hoc add-ins to the formalism are the only known
solution of the issue.
3. Lack of structural (syntactic) robustness. Unlike the semantic logic,
which may be universally applicable for a wide variety of languages,
the syntactic logic often requires special extensions in order to cover
diﬀerent languages and even speciﬁc structures in the same language.
Capturing the semantic categories and their relationships in the very
formalism (rather than in a concrete language model) makes it princi-
pally incapable of modeling language self-learning, that is derivation of
new grammar rules from text samples.
These, along with some other issues and needs motivated researches for
generalizations based on a single logical system, applicable to both semantics
and syntactic structure of a language together, such like (Kasper & Rounds,
1986), (King, 1989) and (Richter, 2004). Higher Order Grammar (HOG)
(Pollard & Hana, 2003; Pollard, 2004; Pollard, 2006) is probably the most
recent implementation of the idea and the ﬁrst one based entirely on the
mainstream classical higher-order logic (HOL), traditionally applied only to
the semantics of natural languages. The speciﬁc HOL employed in HOG
comes in result of the following main steps:
1. introduction of a phonological base type and a constant denoting op-
eration of concatenation of phonologies;
2. introduction of abstract syntax entity base types and constructors of
derived types, comprising (together with these base types) a type kind
SIGN;
3. introduction of another type kind HIPER for semantic interpretations,
which consists of basic types of individuals and propositions and derived
types - functional, product and of function to the boolean type;
2

4. embedding all the three logics - of phonologies, signs and hyperinten-
sions - into a single HOL with ﬁxing a correspondence between SIGN
and HIPER types and adding the two special families of constants de-
noting functions from signs to phonologies and from signs to semantic
interpretations of corresponding types.
A concrete language is modeled in HOG by adding a set of non-logical
axioms to postulate semantics and phonology of speciﬁc words and rules of
their composition.
Due to introduction of the phonological type and constants for mapping
signs to phonologies, HOG model is certainly better prepared for a formal ac-
count of lexical robustness. Also, since directionality in HOG can be handled
by the phonological interpretation, it is suﬃcient for it to have a single uni-
versal sign type constructor (implication) that partially addresses the issue
of structural robustness. However, as the syntactic and semantic type kinds
are fully separated, HOG still cannot address the issue of self-expressiveness.
Another important implication of the HOG architecture, as it was noticed
in (Gluzberg, 2009), is that semantic interpretation of any sentence or a
constituent of it turns out to be represented not by a single HOL term, nor
even by a set of some arbitrarily selected terms (in case of ambiguity), but
by a whole class of logically equivalent terms, in a precise sense deﬁned in
the referenced work. Referring to languages revealing this semantic property
as to logically closed languages, one can say that all HOG-deﬁned languages
are necessarily logically closed. It was also explained in (Gluzberg, 2009)
why the inverse question, i.e. whether any logically closed language can be
deﬁned by a HOG with a given set of base SIGN types and type constructors,
cannot be answered positively.
This result gives another evidence of the
limited robustness of the HOG model.
In the present work we examine what can be achieved by embedding into
a HOL only the logic of phonologies, without introduction of special types for
syntactic entities, but with use of non-logical constants of regular functional
types to deﬁne syntax-to-phonology and syntax-to-semantics interfaces in a
concrete language model. As such a language representation is, as well as
HOG, entirely based on provability in the single HOL, all the languages it
can model are still logically closed. The main result of this work consists
of a proof of the inverse statement: any logically closed language can be
represented in the proposed HOL framework.
This justiﬁes our referring
to it as to Universal Higher-Order Grammar. Being fully free of embedded
3

syntactic restrictions and of limitations on types of semantic interpretations,
this formalism can eﬃciently address all the issues with the two-component
architecture of a language model mentioned above and therefore may have
several theoretical and practical implications.
The structure of the paper is as follows.
After the introduction in Section 2 of basic notations and some assump-
tions on the axiomatization of a sorted type theory (Tyn), in Section 3 we
deﬁne the class of logically closed languages and introduce a few basic oper-
ations that act within this class.
In Section 4 we deﬁne an extension TyA
n of Tyn by interpreting one of
its base types as symbolic, which is quite similar to the phonological type
of HOG, and introduce the notion of Tyn-representability of a language,
illustrated with a few preliminary examples.
Then in Section 5 we prove that classes of Tyn-representable and logically
closed languages precisely coincide.
In the following sections we give explicit constructions of special Tyn
representations for some important sub-classes of logically closed languages
that are described by ﬁnite sets of rules or rule schemata.
In Section 6 we consider so-called lexicons, i.e. ﬁnitely generated logically
closed languages, deﬁne special canonic Tyn representation and prove that a
language has a canonic representation if and only if it is a lexicon.
In Section 7 a Tyn representation is built for a recursive logically closed
grammar (RG), deﬁned as a tuple of logically closed languages linked with
each other by a set of relationships expressed by the basic operations in-
troduced in Section 3. As it becomes clear from illustrating examples, the
language components of an RG stand for syntactic categories.
In Section 8 we consider a further specialization of TyA
n by interpreting
another base type as a context, similar (though not identical) to ”state of
aﬀairs” or ”World” types of (Gallin, 1975) and (Pollard, 2005), respectively.
This specialization allows to represent also intensional languages and further
deﬁne instructive and context-dependent languages. Introduction of a few
new language construction operations then allows us to generalize the pre-
vious results to context-dependent languages. We demonstrate some impor-
tant capabilities of this formalism by examples of how it addresses pronoun
anaphora resolution.
In Section 9 we introduce translation and expression operators that lead
to a special language representation, revealing a useful property of partial
translation.
4

In Section 10 we conclude by brieﬂy summarizing and discussing the most
important implications of the obtained results and outline some open issues.
2
Notations
Following (Gallin, 1975), we denote by Tyn a sorted type theory with a set
of primitive types consisting of the truth type t and individual types e1, e2,
... en of n > 1 diﬀerent sorts. For the ﬁrst individual type we will also use
a shorter alias e =def e1. For sake of better visibility and compactness we
combine the full syntax of Tyn from syntaxes of Ty2 of (Gallin, 1975) and
Q0 of (Andrews, 1986) and extend it as follows.
Derived types
(i) If α and β are types, then (αβ) or just αβ is a functional type, inter-
preted as type of functions from α to β. The parenthesis are mandatory
only in complex types, in order to express association in an order other
than from right to left, for example: et, tee, (et)e are equivalent to (et),
(t(ee)), ((et)e). Note that, unlike (Andrews, 1986), we write “from”
and “to” types from left to right.
(ii) If α and β are types, then (α × β) or just α × β is a product type,
interpreted as type of pairs of elements from α and β, so that, for
example, (α × β)γ is equivalent to αβγ and γ(α × β) to γα × γβ.
Repeated product constructors are also associated from right to left,
i.e. (α × β × γ) is equivalent to (α × (β × γ)).
Variables
x, y, z subscripted by types and optionally superscripted by integer indices
stand for variables of corresponding types, for example: yet, x1
e, x2
e.
Constants
Non-logical constants are written as capital C in bold, subscripted by a type
and superscripted by an index, like C0
t. We do not assume Tyn to necessarily
have a constant Ci
α of a given type α for any index i. Rather, we assume
the constants to be indexed in such a way that admits expanding Tyn by
arbitrarily many new constants of any type. We also use arbitrary letters or
words in bold (like Assert or Empty) as mnemonic aliases for some constant
5

that are assumed to have special semantics or/and satisfy some non-logical
axioms in an extension of Tyn. Similar notations may also be introduced
for some logical constants, i.e. pure bound terms, like, for example, identity
Iαα =def λxαxα.
Terms
(i) Variables and constants comprise elementary terms.
(ii) If Aαβ and Bα are terms of the corresponding types, then application
Aαβ Bα is a term of type β denoting (in an interpretation of Tyn) the
value of the function denoted by Aαβ at the argument denoted by Bα.
(iii) If Aβ is a term of type β then lambda abstraction λxαAβ is a term
of type αβ denoting a function whose value for any argument is the
denotation of Aβ.
(iv) If Aα and Bα are terms of type α, then Aα = Bα is a term of type t,
denoting the identity relation between elements of type α.
(v) If Aα and Bβ are terms of the corresponding types, then the pair
(Aα, Bβ) is a term of type α × β denoting the ordered pair of de-
notations of Aα and Bβ; repeated operators (, ) are associated from
right to left, so that a tuple (A1
α1, A2
α2, ...Am
αm) denotes the same as
(A1
α1, (A2
α2, (...Am
αm)...)).
(vi) Finally, for a term Aα×β of a type α×β, projections π1Aα×β and π2Aα×β
are terms of types α and β respectively, denoting the elements of the
pair denoted by Aα×β.
We assume an axiomatization of Tyn be a straightforward generalization
to case of n > 2 individual types of either the theory denoted as Tyn + D
in (Gallin, 1975) or the theory Q0 of (Andrews, 1986). With either choice,
for any type α the description operator ι(αt)α and hence the ”if-then-else”
constant Cααtα are available with the fundamental properties
⊢ι(αt)α λxα(yα = xα) = yα
⊢Cααtα xα yα T = xa,
⊢Cααtα xα yα F = ya.
All the usual Boolean connectives, including terms F and T denoting
the false and true values, and quantiﬁers can be deﬁned in Tyn exactly the
6

same way as in Ty2 and Q0. In addition, we will also employ the following
notational shortcuts:
Aα ̸= Bα
=def
∼(Aα = Bα),
∼Aαt
=def
λxα ∼(Aαt xα),
Aαt ∨Bαt
=def
λxα(Aαt xα ∨Bαt xα),
Aαt ∧Bαt
=def
λxα(Aαt xα ∧Bαt xα),
Aαt & Bβt
=def
λxαλxβ(Aαt xα & Bβt xβ),
Aαt →Bβt
=def
∀xα(Aαt xα →Bαt xα),
Aα|Bα
=def
Cααtα Aα Bα,
and, for an arbitrary binary operator O:
(O Bβ)
=def
λxα(xα O Bβ),
(Aα O)
=def
λxβ(Aα O xβ),
(O)
=def
λxαλxβ(xα O xβ),
(an operator sign in such shortcuts might be subscripted by a type, like, for
example, (=eet) to denote speciﬁcally λxeλye(xe = ye).
In the meta-language:
(i) the ⊢sign denotes provability in Tyn or an extension of it, speciﬁed by
a context;
(ii) the notation Aα(Bβ) stands for the result of substituting all occurrences
of a free variable xβ in a term Aα by a term Bβ free for xβ in Aα;
(iii) if M is a model of Tyn and a - an assignment of variables in this model,
then J·KM denotes interpretation of a constant in M and J·KM,a denotes
the value of an arbitrary term assigned to it by a in M;
(iv) =⇒and ⇐⇒express implication and logical equivalence.
3
Logically closed languages
The two fundamental formalizations of the notion of language with which we
deal in this work - α-language and logically closed α-language have been in-
troduced and informally discussed in (Gluzberg, 2009). We reproduce these
7

formal deﬁnitions here with the current notations for more convenient refer-
ences.
Deﬁnition 3.1. Let A be a ﬁnite alphabet {a1, a2, ...aN}, let A∗denote the
set of all words over this alphabet and let Tα denote the set of all α-terms of
Tyn. An α-language is a relation L ⊂A∗⊗Tα.
Referring to words over alphabet A as “expressions” and α-terms as “α-
meanings,” one can say that an α-language is a set of pairs of expressions
and their α-meanings. A set of words L ⊂A∗can then be considered as a
language for the unit type meaning. In general case, the projection of L to
A∗is the set of all valid expressions of L, to which set we refer as to domain
of the language and the projection of L to Tα is the set of all meanings L
can express, to which set we refer as to range of the language.
A trivial particular case of an α-language is a singleton {(w, Aα)}, where
w ∈A∗.
If L and K are α-languages, then their union L ∪K is a new α-language
that contains all expressions and corresponding meanings of both L and K.
The following deﬁnitions introduce some further operations to build com-
plex languages from simpler ones.
Deﬁnition 3.2. If L is an α-language and K is a β-language, then their
language concatenation is the α × β-language
L ∗K =def {(uv, (Aα, Bβ)) | (u, Aα) ∈L ∧(v, Bβ) ∈K}
where uv denotes concatenation of words u and v.
Deﬁnition 3.3. For a given α-language L and a relation R ⊂Tα ⊗Tβ, the
semantic rule application is the β-language
L ⊲R =def {(w, Bβ) | (w, Aα) ∈L ∧(Aα, Bβ) ∈R}.
Thus, application of a semantic rule cannot extend the domain of a lan-
guage, but only maps the set of meanings of every its expression to another
set (generally of a diﬀerent type); if the new set turns out to be empty, then
the corresponding expression is ”ﬁltered out” from the domain of resulting
language. An important example of a semantic rule application is ”folding”
product-type meanings of a concatenation of two languages to meanings of a
scalar type. Note that a folding rule which also ﬁlters out some expressions
8

from the language concatenation in fact can check an agreement between the
concatenated constituents (at the semantic level).
The above deﬁnition of an α-language seems to provide the most gen-
eral formalization for the notion of a language whose distinct meanings are
understood as syntactically diﬀerent (although possibly logically equivalent)
Tyn terms of a certain type. For example, the representation of Tyn formu-
las in the Tyn language is itself a t-language. In the application to natural
languages, however, a more restricted formalization might be more suitable:
Deﬁnition 3.4. A logically closed α-language is an α-language L such that
whenever (w, Bα) ∈L, (w, Cα) ∈L and ⊢Aα = Bα ∨Aα = Cα then
(w, Aα) ∈L also. A minimal logically closed α-language L which includes a
given arbitrary α-language L is said to be its logical closure.
This deﬁnition actually captures the two important features of a logically
closed α-language:
1. If an expression w in the language has a meaning Bα, then it also has
every meaning Aα logically equivalent to Bα
2. If an expression w is ambiguous, i.e. has at least two distinct meanings
Bα and Cα being not logically equivalent, then it also has every meaning
Aα which is provable to be equal either Bα or Cα.
Therefore, every valid expression of a logically closed language is associ-
ated not with a single, nor even with a set of arbitrarily selected terms (in
case of ambiguity), but with a whole class of logically equivalent terms. A
precise formulation of this interpretation follows.
Deﬁnition 3.5. A set M ⊂Tα is said to be logically closed iﬀwhenever
Bα ∈M, Cα ∈M and
⊢Aα = Bα ∨Aα = Cα
(3.1)
then Aα ∈M also. A minimal logically closed set M ⊂Tα which includes
an arbitrary set M ⊂Tα is said to be its logical closure. If in addition,
N ⊂Tα and M = N, we say the two sets M and N be logically equivalent
and denote this relation as M ≃N .
9

It is readily seen that ≃is an equivalence relation in the power set P(Tα)
and therefore a logically closed α-language might be deﬁned equivalently as
a function L : A∗→P(Tα)/ ≃.
The simplest non-empty logically closed α-language is a logical singleton
S = {w} ⊗{Aα}.
(3.2)
As it has been shown in (Gluzberg, 2009), any language deﬁned by a
Higher Order Grammar (HOG) (Pollard & Hana, 2003; Pollard, 2004; Pol-
lard, 2006) is necessarily logically closed.
Note that the class of logically closed languages is not closed under the
union operation nor under operations of language concatenation and semantic
rule applications deﬁned above. Similar operations that act within this class
can be deﬁned as follows.
Deﬁnition 3.6. If L and K are α-languages, then their logical join is an
α-language L ∪K =def L ∪K.
Deﬁnition 3.7. If L is an α-language and K is a β-language, then their
logical concatenation is an α × β-language L ∗K =def L ∗K.
Deﬁnition 3.8. A semantic rule R ⊂Tα ⊗Tβ is said to be logically closed
if the full image of any logically closed set M ⊂Tα under the relation R is
logically closed.
Thus, a logical join and logical concatenation of arbitrary languages, as
well as application of a logically closed semantic rule to any language of the
matching type, are all logically closed languages.
The following associativity and monotonicity properties follow directly
from the above deﬁnitions.
Lemma 3.1. For any α-languages K, L, a β-language M and a rule
R ⊂Tα ⊗Tβ,
(K ∪L) ∗M
=
K ∗M ∪L ∗M,
M ∗(K ∪L)
=
M ∗K ∪M ∗L,
(K ∪L) ⊲R
=
K ⊲R ∪L ⊲R,
K ⊂L
=⇒
K ∗M ⊂L ∗M,
K ⊂L
=⇒
M ∗K ⊂M ∗L,
K ⊂L
=⇒
K ⊲R ⊆L ⊲R.
10

Deﬁnition 3.9. A logically closed set M ⊂Tα is said to be ﬁnitely generated
if it is the logical closure of a ﬁnite set M ⊂Tα.
Deﬁnition 3.10. A logically closed semantic rule R ⊂Tα ⊗Tβ is said to
be ﬁnitely ambiguous if for any term Aα, the full image of {Aα} under the
relation R is ﬁnitely generated.
An important class of ﬁnitely ambiguous semantic rules is given by the
following
Deﬁnition 3.11. A logically closed semantic rule R ⊂Tα ⊗Tβ is said to
have a canonic representation in Dα ⊂Tα if there exists a TyA
n term Rαβt
such that
(Aα, Bβ) ∈R
⇐⇒
⊢Rαβt Aα Bβ
and for any Aα ∈Dα
⊢Rαβt Aα =
k_
i=1
(= Bi
β),
where the terms B1
β, ... Bk
β as well as the number k may depend on Aα and
in the case k = 0 the disjunction is reduced to λxβF. We further qualify a
rule with a canonic representation in Dα ⊂Tα as non-degenerate, degenerate,
unambiguous or ambiguous in Dα, if k > 0 for all Aα ∈Dα, k = 0 for some
Aα ∈Dα, k = 1 for all Aα ∈Dα or k > 1 for some Aα ∈Dα, respectively.
An important example of a semantic rule with a canonic representation
in any domain is given by a particular case where
Rαβt =def λxα(= Fαβ xα)
which is referred to below as a functional semantic rule. Note that a func-
tional rule is both non-degenerate and unambiguous in any domain.
4
Symbolic type and Tyn-representable
languages
Consider an extension TyA
n of Tyn with the following set of non-logical ax-
ioms, where s denotes the primitive type en and As + Bs =def C0
sss As Bs:
∀xs((xs + C0
s = xs) ∧(C0
s + xs = xs)),
(4.1)
11

∀xs∀ys∀zs((xs + ys) + zs = xs + (ys + zs)),
(4.2)
∀xs∀ys∀zs(xs + Ci
s + ys ̸= xs + Cj
s + zs),
for all 1 ≤i < j ≤N.
(4.3)
It is easy to see that these axioms are valid in a model M with the s-domain
Ds =def A∗and interpretation J·KM such that JC0
sKM is the empty word
ǫ ∈A∗, JCi
sKM is ai ∈A for 1 ≤i ≤N, all the rest of the s-constants are
interpreted by compound words from A∗and, ﬁnally, the operation (+) is
interpreted as the operation of word concatenation. This observation proves
the consistency of TyA
n and justiﬁes our referring to the type s as symbolic
type. Note that formally, with the accuracy up to the additional axiom 4.3,
the symbolic type is quite similar to the phonological type of HOG (Pol-
lard, 2006). We use the diﬀerent term here in order to reﬂect the additional
axiomatic restriction, expressing distinction of the alphabet symbols, signiﬁ-
cant in any context, and also keeping in mind that generally they may stand
for symbols of an arbitrary nature, for example, graphic, as well as phonetic,
in which case TyA
n might be further extended to accommodate more symbol
aggregation operations in addition to the linear concatenation.
TyA
n allows some α-languages to be naturally deﬁned by its terms or
possibly by the terms of its extension TyA+
n
with a set of additional non-
logical constants. Indeed, deﬁne the mapping TA : A∗→Ts as follows
TA(ǫ) = C0
s,
TA(ai) = Ci
s,
TA(aiw) = Ci
s + TA(w),
(4.4)
and let ∆be a consistent set of TyA+
n
formulas. Then the condition
∆⊢Lsαt TA(w) Aα
for any TyA+
n
term Lsαt deﬁnes an α-language (⊢here and everywhere below
denotes provability in TyA+
n ).
Deﬁnition 4.1. Let TyA+
n
be an extension of TyA
n , ∆a consistent set of TyA+
n
formulas and Lsαt a TyA+
n
term. An α-language L is said to be represented
by (∆, Lsαt) if for any TyA
n term Aα and w ∈A∗
(w, Aα) ∈L
⇐⇒
∆⊢Lsαt TA(w) Aα.
Note that in the case of a ﬁnite set ∆, by the Deduction Theorem, a
language represented by (∆, Lsαt) is also represented by (∅, λxsλxα(Dt →
Lsαtxsxα)) where Dt is the conjunction of all formulas of ∆and the variables
xs, xα are not free in Dt. In this case we say the language to have a compact
Tyn representation or, alternatively, to be represented by a term.
12

Deﬁnition 4.2. An α-language L is said to be representable in TyA
n , or Tyn-
representable for short, if there exists an extension TyA+
n
of TyA
n , a consistent
set ∆of TyA+
n
formulas and a TyA+
n
term Lsαt such that L is represented by
(∆, Lsαt).
Here are a few simple examples of Tyn-representable languages:
• the term (= TA(w)) &(= Aα) represents a logical singleton (3.2);
• the term λxs(= C0
sα xs) represents an α-language where every word w
is a valid expression for the application C0
sα TA(w);
• the term (=sst) represents an s-language that realizes the mapping
(4.4), i.e. associates with every word w a single “meaning” TA(w).
In case of alphabet A consisting of symbols that can be typed in this
paper (including a space), a more convenient notation for mapping TA can be
introduced: if w is an arbitrary string of such symbols, let /w/ =def TA(w).
Then, by deﬁnition 4.1, for arbitrary strings u, v, /u/ + /v/ = /uv/; for
example: /c/+/a/+/r/ = /car/. We will make use of this practical notation
in some of subsequent sections.
5
Tyn representation existence theorem
We now show that an α-language is Tyn-representable if and only if it is
logically closed.
Proposition 5.1. If an α-language L is Tyn-representable, then it is logically
closed.
Proof. Let (∆, Lsαt) be a representation of L, w ∈A∗,
∆⊢Lsαt TA(w) Bα,
∆⊢Lsαt TA(w) Cα
and
⊢Aα = Bα ∨Aα = Cα.
From this derivation, by the metatheorems
⊢At ∨Bt = (At|Bt) Bt,
(5.1)
⊢(Pαβ Aα|Pαβ Bα) Ct = Pαβ((Aα|Bα) Ct),
(5.2)
it follows that
⊢Aα = (Bα|Cα) (Aα = Cα)
13

and
⊢Lsαt TA(w) Aα = (Lsαt TA(w) Bα | Lsαt TA(w) Cα) (At = Cα).
Thus the ﬁrst two derivations imply ∆⊢Lsαt TA(w)Aα, that is, (w, Aα) ∈L
also.
Lemma 5.2. In any TyA
n model, the s-domain Ds contains a subset D′
s
isomorphic to A∗with respect to concatenation operations and such that
JTA(w)KM ∈D′
s for any w ∈A∗.
Proof. Let M be a TyA
n model and ci =def JCi
sKM for i = 0, ... N. Deﬁne the
mapping VA : A∗→Ds as follows:
VA(ǫ) = c0,
VA(ai) = ci,
VA(ai + w) = ci J+KM VA(w).
Since axioms 4.1 - 4.3 are valid in M, VA is a one-to-one mapping and
VA(u + v) = VA(u) J+KM VA(v).
Thus the full image D′
s of A∗under this mapping is isomorphic to A∗and,
by Deﬁnition 4.4, JTA(w)KM ∈D′
s for any w ∈A∗.
This lemma actually allows to identify JTA(w)KM with w, J+KM - with
word concatenation and the subset D′
s - with A∗in any TyA
n model M.
Lemma 5.3. If M ⊂Tα is logically closed, A1
α ∈M, ... Ak
α ∈M and
⊢Aα = A1
α ... ∨Aα = Ak
α, then Aα ∈M also.
Proof. The proof is by induction on k. For k ≤2, the statement follows
directly from Deﬁnition 3.5. For k > 2, by the metatheorems 5.1, 5.2 and
⊢(((Aα|Bα) Ct) = Aα) ∨(((Aα|Bα) Ct) = Bα),
we have
⊢Aα = Bα ∨Aα = Ak
α,
where
Bα =def (...(A1
α| ...|Ak−2
α
)(Aα = Ak−2
α
)|Ak−1
α
)(Aα = Ak−1
α
)
and therefore
⊢Bα = A1
α ... ∨Bα = Ak−1
α
.
Thus, if this implies that Bα ∈M, then Aα ∈M also, according to Deﬁnition
3.5.
14

Proposition 5.4. Let an α-language L be logically closed, let the constant
C0
sαt belong to TyA+
n , but not to TyA
n , and let ∆L be the minimal set of TyA+
n
formulas such that, whenever (w, Aα) ∈L, the formula C0
sαtTA(w)Aα belongs
to ∆L. Then (∆L, C0
sαt) is a representation of L.
Proof. Consistency of the set ∆L follows from the fact that all its formulas
are valid in a model where the constant C0
sαt is interpreted by a function
taking the true value for all its arguments.
The implication (w, Aα) ∈L =⇒∆L ⊢C0
sαt TA(w) Aα follows directly
from the deﬁnition of ∆L.
To prove the opposite implication, assume that ∆L ⊢C0
sαt TA(w) Aα and
∆w is the (necessarily ﬁnite) subset of axioms from ∆L participating in a
proof of this derivation, so that
∆w ⊢C0
sαt TA(w) Aα
(5.3)
as well. Let A1
α, ... Ak
α be all those terms that occur in the formulas
C0
sαt TA(w) Ai
α belonging to ∆w. If (w, Aα) ̸∈L, then there exist a TyA
n
model M and an assignment of variables a such that JAαKM,a ̸= JAi
αKM,a for
all i = 1, ...k. Indeed, due to the Completeness Theorem, we would otherwise
have
⊢Aα = A1
α ... ∨Aα = Ak
α
and therefore, by Lemma 5.3 and the assumption of logical closure of L,
(w, Aα) ∈L. Consider an extension M+ of the model M for TyA+
n
where
JC0
sαtKM is the function taking the true value for all its arguments except for
(w, JAαKM,a) (where w stands for JTA(w)KM, according to Lemma 5.2). All
formulas of ∆w are satisﬁed by the assignment a in M+, but C0
sαt TA(w) Aα
is not. By the Soundness Theorem, this contradicts 5.3 and thus proves that
(w, Aα) ∈L.
Propositions 5.1 and 5.4 immediately imply
Theorem 5.5. An α-language is Tyn-representable iﬀit is logically closed.
Note that this general result is not constructive in the sense that it does
not entail an eﬀective procedure for actually building a Tyn representation
for an inﬁnite language that might be deﬁned by a ﬁnite set of rules or rule
schemata. At the same time, it neither implies the uniqueness of the Tyn
representation and thus does not preclude a representation of such a language
15

that may be compact or described by a ﬁnite set of axiom schemata. We will
ﬁnd such representations for some important special classes of logically closed
languages in the following sections.
6
Lexicons and canonic representation
Deﬁnition 6.1. An α −lexicon is a logically closed α-language which is the
logical closure of a ﬁnite α-language.
Deﬁnition 6.2. An α-language is said to have a canonic representation if it
is represented by a term Lsαt such that
⊢Lsαt = (= A1
s) &(= A1
α) ... ∨(= Al
s) &(= Al
α)
where all Ai
s are s-constants and Ai
α are Tyn terms.
In this section we show that any α-lexicon has a canonic representation.
Lemma 6.1. ⊢TA(u) = TA(v) iﬀu = v and ⊢TA(u) ̸= TA(v) iﬀu ̸= v.
Proof. According to 4.1 – 4.3, if m = l and i1 = j1, ... il = jl, then
⊢Ci1
s ... + Cil
s = Cj1
s ... + Cjm
s
and if at least one of these conditions does not hold, then
⊢Ci1
s ... + Cil
s ̸= Cj1
s ... + Cjm
s .
This proves both statements.
Lemma 6.2. Let the mapping TAα from the set of α-languages to the power
set P(Ts ⊗Tα) be deﬁned by
TAα(L) = {(TA(w), Aα) | (w, Aα) ∈L}.
Then L is the logical closure of L iﬀTAα(L) is the logical closure of TAα(L).
Proof. As usual for any closure constructed by a ternary relation, a term
belongs to a logical closure iﬀthere exists a ﬁnite proof tree where this term
is the root, every non-leaf node Aα has a pair of children Bα, Cα that satisfy
the relation (3.1) and all leaves belong to the original set. Similarly, a pair
16

from A∗⊗Tα belongs to the logical closure of an α-language iﬀthere exists a
ﬁnite proof tree where this pair is the root, every non-leaf node (w, Aα) has
a pair of children (w, Bα), (w, Cα) where Bα and Cα satisfy the relation (3.1)
and leaves belong to the original language. Replacing every node (w, Aα) of
such a tree with (TA(w), Aα) by Lemma 6.1 converts it to a proof tree for the
logical closure of TAα(L). Thus if L is the logical closure of L, then TAα(L)
is the logical closure of TAα(L). To prove the opposite implication, note that
due to the tautology
⊢At ∧Ct ∨Bt ∧Dt →Ct ∨Dt,
the relation
⊢As = Bs ∧Aα = Bα
∨As = Cs ∧Aα = Cα
implies (3.1). Therefore replacing every node (As, Aα) of a proof tree for the
logical closure of TAα(L) with (w, Aα), where w is the expression occurring
in the root of the original tree, converts it to a proof tree for L, by Lemma
6.1.
Deﬁnition 6.3. A set M ⊂Tα is said to be represented by a term Mαt if
Aα ∈M ⇐⇒⊢MαtAα.
Lemma 6.3. The logical closure M of a ﬁnite set M = {A1
α, ... Ak
α} is
represented by the term Mαt =def (= A1
α) ... ∨(= Ak
α).
Proof. ⊢MαtBα and ⊢MαtCα together with (3.1) imply ⊢MαtAα by the
metatheorem
⊢(Aα = Bα ∧MαtBα) →MαtAα
(also applied to Cα) and the tautology
⊢(At ∨Bt) ∧Dt ∧Et →(At ∧Dt ∨Bt ∧Et).
Thus, the set deﬁned by ⊢MαtAα is logically closed and therefore, according
to Deﬁnition 3.5, includes M. The opposite inclusion follows directly from
Lemma 5.3.
Theorem 6.4. A logically closed language has a canonic representation iﬀ
it is a lexicon.
17

Proof. Let L = {(w1, A1
α), ... (wl, Al
α)} and
Lsαt =def (= A1
s) &(= A1
α) ... ∨(= Al
s) &(= Al
α),
where Ai
s =def TA(wi). According to Lemma 6.3, the term Lsαt represents
the logical closure of TAα(L) and therefore, according to Lemma 6.2, also the
logical closure L.
7
Recursive languages and representations
Given a ﬁnite set of lexicons, one can obtain an arbitrarily complex logically
closed language by recursively applying the operations of logical join, logical
concatenation and application of semantic rules to the initial lexicons. In
this section we will see how a compact Tyn representation of such a recursive
language can be built.
Deﬁnition 7.1. Let L1, ...Lm be logically closed languages and let one of
the following be true for every 1 ≤i ≤m:
(i) Li is a lexicon and Li
sαit is its canonic representation
(ii) there exist such 1 ≤j(i) ≤m and 1 ≤k(i) ≤m that Li = Lj(i) ∪Lk(i)
(iii) there exist such 1 ≤j(i) ≤m and 1 ≤k(i) ≤m that Li = Lj(i) ∗Lk(i)
(iv) there exists such 1 ≤j(i) ≤m that Li = Lj(i) ⊲Ri, where a logically
closed semantic rule Ri has a canonic representation Ri
αj(i)αit in the
range of Lj(i).
The full set RG of these conditions comprises a recursive grammar for the
languages L1, ...Lm.
For a given recursive grammar, let L denote the language tuple (L1, ...Lm),
let L0 denote a tuple of lexicons such that L0
i =def Li whenever Li is a lexicon
and L0
i = ∅otherwise and let L′ denote a language tuple such that L′
i = ∅
whenever Li is a lexicon and L′
i is the right-hand part of the equality in con-
dition (ii), (iii) or (iv) otherwise. Finally, let ˆE denote the operator which
produces L′ for a given L, so that the recursive grammar can be written as
L = L0 ∪ˆEL,
(7.1)
where ∪stands for a component-wise logical join of language tuples of the
same arity and types.
18

Proposition 7.1. Equation 7.1 is satisﬁed by
L =
∞
[
i=0
Li,
(7.2)
where
Li = L0 ∪ˆELi−1,
for all i ≥1.
(7.3)
Proof. As the operator ˆE is a combination of logical joins, logical concatena-
tions and semantic rule applications, it inherits the monotonicity property
L ⊆K
=⇒
ˆEL ⊆ˆEK,
(7.4)
where K is a language tuple of the same arity and types as L and ⊆stands
for component-wise inclusion. From this and 7.3, by induction on i it follows
that
Li ⊃Li−1,
for all i ≥1.
Therefore, for any tuple e =def ((w1, Aα1), ...(wm, Aαm)) there exists an index
i(e) such that
e ∈ˆE
∞
[
i=0
Li
=⇒
e ∈ˆELi(e),
where ∈stands for component-wise membership. From here, for the tuple L
given by 7.2 we have that
e ∈L0 ∪ˆEL
=⇒
e ∈L0 ∪ˆELi(e) = Li(e)+1,
that is, L0 ∪ˆEL ⊆L. On the other hand, from the same property 7.4 we
have that L0 ∪ˆEL ⊇L0 ∪ˆELi for any i ≥0 and therefore L0 ∪ˆEL ⊇L.
Thus, L0 ∪ˆEL = L.
Note that in the general case, 7.2 might be not a single solution satisfying
a recursive grammar. It can, however, be shown to be a subset of any other
existing solution. This fact will not be used below and hence needs not be
proven here, but we will refer to the solution 7.2 as the minimal one.
Deﬁnition 7.2. For a given recursive grammar RG, let ∆RG denote the set
of m formulas D1
t , ...Dm
t , where
(i) Di
t =def (Ci
sαit = Li
sαit), if Li is a lexicon represented by Li
sαit,
19

(ii) Di
t =def (Ci
sαit = Cj(i)
sαit ∨Ck(i)
sαit), if Li = Lj(i) ∪Lk(i),
(iii) Di
t =def (Ci
sαit = Cj(i)
sαj(i)t ∗Ck(i)
sαk(i)t), if Li = Lj(i) ∗Lk(i), so that αi =def
αj(i) × αk(i),
(iv) Di
t =def (Ci
sαit = Cj(i)
sαj(i)t ⊲Ri
αj(i)αit), if Li = Lj(i) ⊲Ri and Ri is repre-
sented by Ri
αj(i)αit,
all the constants C1
sα1t, ... Cm
sαmt are assumed to exist only in an extension
TyA+
n , but not in TyA
n , and the TyA
n operators of logical concatenation and
semantic rule application are deﬁned as follows:
(∗(sαt)(sβt)sαβt) =def λxsαtλysβtλxsλxαλxβ∃ys∃zs
(xs = ys + zs ∧xsαt ys xα ∧ysβt zs xβ),
(⊲(sαt)(αβt)sβt) =def λxsαtλyαβtλxsλxβ∃xα(xsαt xs xα ∧yαβt xα xβ).
Below we will also make use of the TyA
n operator of a functional semantic
rule application:
(⇒(sαt)(αβ)sβt) =def λxsαtλyαβ(xsαt ⊲(λxα(= yαβ xα))).
Note that every singleton (= A1
s) &(= A1
α) can be equivalently written down
as (= A1
s) ⇒A1
α.
We now prove that every language Li of the minimal solution of a recur-
sive grammar RG is represented by (∆RG, Ci
sαit). To do so, we introduce the
following auxiliary
Deﬁnition 7.3. An α-language L is said to have a pseudo-canonic represen-
tation if it is represented by (∆, Lsαt) such that for any word w ∈A∗there
exists a ﬁnite (may be empty) set {A1
α, ... Al
α} of TyA
n terms such that
∆⊢Lsαt TA(w) =
l_
i=1
(= Ai
α)
and adding ∆to TyA+
n
as new axioms forms a conservative extension of TyA
n
(i.e. for any TyA
n formula At
⊢At
iﬀ
∆⊢At).
Note that a canonic representation of an α-lexicon is a particular case of
a pseudo-canonic representation.
20

Lemma 7.2. If ∆is a consistent set of TyA+
n
formulas and for any general
model M of TyA
n and an assignment of variables in that model there exists an
extension M+ of M for TyA+
n
in which ∆is satisﬁed by the same assignment
of variables, then adding ∆to TyA+
n
forms a conservative extension of TyA
n .
Proof. By the Completeness Theorem, if not ⊢At, then there exists a general
TyA
n model M and assignment of variables a by which At is not satisﬁed in M.
If M can be extended to a model M+ for TyA+
n
where ∆is still satisﬁed by
a, then by the Soundness Theorem the derivation ∆⊢At is impossible.
Lemma 7.3. The set {A1
α, ... Al
α} appearing in the ﬁrst condition of Deﬁni-
tion 7.3 generates all meanings of w in the language L.
Proof. If Aa is a TyA
n term and (w, Aα) ∈L, then ∆⊢Lsαt TA(w) Aa and
therefore
∆⊢(Aα = A1
α) ... ∨(Aα = Al
α),
which implies that
⊢(Aα = A1
α) ... ∨(Aα = Al
α).
Thus, by Lemma 6.3, any meaning of w belongs to the logical closure of
{A1
α, ... Al
α}.
Lemma 7.4. In any recursive grammar RG, a lexicon Li with a canonic
representation Li
sαit also has the pseudo-canonic representation (∆RG, Li
sαit).
Proof. The ﬁrst condition of Deﬁnition 7.3 follows directly from the assump-
tion that Li
sαit is a canonic representation.
Now we prove that the set ∆RG is consistent and also satisﬁed by a given
assignment of variables a in some extension M+ of an arbitrary TyA
n model
M. Lemma 5.2 and the fact that a recursive grammar is satisﬁed by some
logically closed languages L1, ... Lm allow the extension M+ to be deﬁned as
follows: let the function JCi
sαitKM+ for given arguments w ∈Ds and v ∈Dαi
take the true value iﬀw ∈A∗and the language Li contains pairs (w, Aαi)
such that JAαiKM+,a = v. The conditions (i)-(iv) of Deﬁnition 7.2 then imply
that every Di
t is satisﬁed by a in such an extended model. By Lemma 7.2,
this proves the second condition of Deﬁnition 7.3.
Lemma 7.5. If M and N are logical closures of M ∈Tα and N ∈Tα
respectively, then M ∪N = M ∪N.
21

Proof. Every element of M ∪N belongs to M ∪N because M ⊆M,
N ⊆N, so a proof tree for any term from M ∪N is also a proof tree
for M ∪N . On the other hand, as every leaf of a proof tree for an element
of M ∪N belongs to either M or N , it can be expanded to a proof tree for
the corresponding set and thus the entire tree can be converted to a proof tree
for M ∪N with the same root, that proves its membership in M ∪N .
Proposition 7.6. Let α-languages L and K have pseudo-canonic represen-
tations (∆, Lsαt) and (∆, Ksαt) respectively. Then their logical join L ∪K is
represented by (∆, Lsαt∨Ksαt), which is also a pseudo-canonic representation.
Proof. Let
∆⊢Lsαt TA(w) =
l_
i=1
(= Ai
α)
and
∆⊢Ksαt TA(w) =
k_
i=1
(= Bi
α).
Then
∆⊢(Lsαt ∨Ksαt) TA(w) =
l_
i=1
(= Ai
α) ∨
k_
i=1
(= Bi
α).
This proves that (∆, Lsαt ∨Ksαt) is a pseudo-canonic representation and
therefore for any TyA
n term Aα,
∆⊢(Lsαt ∨Ksαt) TA(w) Aα
⇐⇒
⊢
l_
i=1
(Aα = Ai
α) ∨
k_
i=1
(Aα = Bi
α).
By Lemmas 7.3, 6.3 and 7.5 this proves that (∆, Lsαt ∨Ksαt) represents
L ∪K.
Proposition 7.7. Let an α-language L have a pseudo-canonic represen-
tation (∆, Lsαt) and a β-language K have a pseudo-canonic representation
(∆, Ksβt). Then the logical concatenation L ∗K is represented by
(∆, Lsαt ∗Ksβt), which is also a pseudo-canonic representation.
Proof. Let w = h0 + t0 = ... = hl + tl be all possible splits of a word w into
head and tail and
∆⊢Lsαt TA(hm) =
lm
_
i=1
(= Am,i
α ),
∆⊢Ksβt TA(tm) =
km
_
j=1
(= Bm,j
β
)
22

(for m = 0, ... l). Then by axioms 4.1 - 4.3 and metatheorems
⊢∃xα(At ∨Bt) = ∃xαAt ∨∃xαBt,
(7.5)
⊢∃xγ(xγ = Aγ ∧Bt(xγ)) = Bt(Aγ)
(7.6)
(where xγ is not free in Aγ) we have:
∆⊢(Lsαt ∗Ksβt) TA(w) =
l_
m=0
lm
_
i=1
km
_
j=1
(= Am,i
α ) &(= Bm,j
β
).
This proves that (∆, Lsαt∗Ksβt) is a pseudo-canonic representation and there-
fore for any TyA
n terms Aα, Bβ,
∆⊢(Lsαt ∗Ksβt) TA(w) AαBβ ⇐⇒⊢
l_
m=0
lm
_
i=1
km
_
j=1
(Aα = Am,i
α ) ∧(Bβ = Bm,j
β
).
By Deﬁnition 3.7 and Lemma 6.3 this proves that (∆, Lsαt ∗Ksβt) represents
L ∗K.
Proposition 7.8. Let an α-language L have a pseudo-canonic representation
(∆, Lsαt) and a rule R ⊂Tα ⊗Tβ have a canonic representation Rαβt in the
range of L. Then the language L⊲R is represented by (∆, Lsαt ⊲Rαβt), which
is also a pseudo-canonic representation.
Proof. Let
∆⊢Lsαt TA(w) =
l_
i=1
(= Ai
α)
and
⊢Rαβt Ai
α =
ki
_
j=1
(= Bi,j
β )
(for i = 1, ...l). Then by metatheorem 7.6 we have
∆⊢(Lsαt ⊲Rαβt) TA(w) =
l_
i=1
ki
_
j=1
(= Bi,j
β ).
23

This proves that (∆, Lsαt ⊲Rαβt) is a pseudo-canonic representation and
therefore for any TyA
n term Bβ,
∆⊢(Lsαt ⊲Rαβt) TA(w) Bβ
⇐⇒
⊢
l_
i=1
ki
_
j=1
(Bβ = Bi,j
β ).
By Deﬁnition 3.3 and Lemma 6.3 this proves that (∆, Lsαt ⊲Rαβt) represents
L ⊲R.
Propositions 7.6 - 7.8 establish that, given some logically closed languages
known to have pseudo-canonic representations that share a single common
axiom set ∆and semantic rules that have canonic representations, one can
build Tyn representations of their logical joins, logical concatenations and
applications of the rules by means of the three corresponding TyA
n operators:
(∨(sαt)(sαt)sαt), (∗(sαt)(sβt)sαβt) and (⊲(sαt)(αβt)sβt); moreover these representa-
tions are also pseudo-canonic and share the same axiom set ∆.
Lemma 7.9. TyA
n operators of logical join, logical concatenation and seman-
tic rule application reproduce the associativity and monotonicity properties:
⊢
(xsαt ∨ysαt) ∗zsβt = xsαt ∗zsβt ∨ysαt ∗zsβt,
⊢
zsβt ∗(xsαt ∨ysαt) = zsβt ∗xsαt ∨zsβt ∗ysαt,
⊢
(xsαt ∨ysαt) ⊲zαβt = xsαt ⊲zαβt ∨ysαt ⊲zαβt,
⊢
(xsαt →ysαt) →(xsαt ∗zsβt →ysαt ∗zsβt),
⊢
(xsαt →ysαt) →(zsβt ∗xsαt →zsβt ∗ysαt),
⊢
(xsαt →ysαt) →(xsαt ⊲zαβt →ysαt ⊲zαβt).
Proof. All these properties follow from the deﬁnition of operator (∗(sαt)(sβt)sαβt)
due to the tautologies
⊢(At ∨Bt)∧Ct = At ∧Ct ∨Bt ∧Ct,
⊢Ct ∧(At ∨Bt) = Ct ∧At ∨Ct ∧Bt,
⊢(At →Bt) →(At∧Ct →Bt ∧Ct),
⊢(At →Bt) →(Ct∧At →Ct∧Bt)
and the metatheorems 7.5 and
⊢∀xγ(At →Bt) →(∃xγAt →∃xγBt).
24

Theorem 7.10. Every language Li of the minimal solution of a recursive
grammar RG is represented by (∆RG, Ci
sαit).
Proof. If (using the notations introduced in the proof of Proposition 7.1)
e ∈L, then there exists an index i such that e ∈Li. As every Li is built from
lexicons L0 and L(i−1) by applying logical joins, logical concatenations and
semantic rule applications, from Propositions 7.6 - 7.8 it follows (by induction
on i) that every component Li
j of Li has a pseudo-canonic representation
(∆RG, Li,j
τj ), where for any i > 0
Li,j
τj =def L0,j
τj ∨Ej
τ1...τmτj Li−1,1
τ1
... Li−1,m
τm
,
τj =def sαjt and terms Ej
τ1...τmτj stand for TyA
n operators corresponding to
the operator ˆE. On the other hand, from Deﬁnition 7.2 we have
∆RG ⊢Cj
τj = L0,j
τj ∨Ej
τ1...τmτj C1
τ1 ... Cm
τm.
As by Lemma 7.9 the terms Ej
τ1...τmτj reproduce the monotonicity property
of the operator ˆE, it follows from this that for all i ≥0
∆RG ⊢Li,j
τj →Cj
τj
and therefore, for every j that
∆RG ⊢Cj
τj TA(wj) Aαj.
To prove that, inversely, the above derivations imply e ∈Li, consider the
TyA+
n
model deﬁned in the proof of Lemma 7.4. As such a model can extend
an arbitrary TyA
n model, these derivations imply that there exist such terms
A′
αj that e′ =def ((w1, A′
α1), ... (wm, A′
αm)) ∈L and ⊢A′
αj = Aαj. As Lj are
logically closed, this implies that e ∈L also.
Corollary 7.11. Every language Li of the minimal solution of a recursive
grammar RG is represented by the term λxsλxαiDt →Ci
sαit, where Dt is
the conjunction of all formulas from ∆RG.
Proof. See the note to Deﬁnition 4.1.
The signiﬁcance of these results is that they, in particular, establish a
class of non-trivial Tyn-representable languages which turns out to be decid-
able, in spite of the fact that Tyn is undecidable and hence so are generally
25

Tyn-representable languages. Indeed, assume all the semantic rules partic-
ipating in a grammar RG to be non-degenerate. It is easy to see that in
this assumption the domain of every language Li is formed by a context-free
grammar with the set of terminals being the union of domains of all the
lexicons participating in RG and non-terminal symbols corresponding all the
Li languages. Therefore, this domain falls into the class of context-free (and
hence - recursive) languages of the Chomsky hierarchy. Then, in the addi-
tional assumption of decidability of all the RG semantic rules (which holds,
for example, for any functional rules), the problem of ﬁnding all the logically-
independent representatives of the meanings of an Li expression also turns
out to be decidable, merely by attributing the terminal (leaf) nodes of its
syntactic parsing tree with their (lexicon-determined) meanings and inherit-
ing and evaluating the meanings of upper nodes according to the rules, from
bottom up to the root node. Furthermore, though discarding the assump-
tion of non-degenerateness of all the RG semantic rules may generally lead
to languages Li with domains being context-sensitive (in the classical sense),
retaining only the assumption of the rules decidability still preserves the con-
clusion about decidability of languages Li. In this assumption languages Li
can be parsed, for example, by the two-staged process like this:
1. parse according to the context-free grammar RG obtained from RG
by replacing every rule Ri by the trivial non-degenerate rule with the
canonic representation Riαj(i)αit =def λxαj(i)λxαiT
2. attribute the terminal (leaf) nodes of the parsing tree with their (lexicon-
determined) meanings and inherit and evaluate the meanings of upper
nodes according to the actual rules Ri, or discard the parse if at any
node the actual rule degenerates to λxαiF when applied to all incoming
meanings.
To illustrate the technique of a recursive grammar representation, let us
build a very simple English-like grammar from tiny lexicons, consisting of a
few countable nouns and transitive verbs, the irregular verb ”be”, a proper
26

noun and two determiners:
Nouns(et)t
=
(= /builder/) ⇒Builderet ∨
(= /house/) ⇒Houseet ∨
(= /car/) ⇒Caret,
Verbts(eet)t
=
(= /build/) ⇒Buildeet ∨
=
(= /sell/) ⇒Selleet,
VerbBes(eet)t
=
(= /be/) ⇒(=eet),
Nameset
=
(= /Jack/) ⇒Jacke,
Dets((et)(et)t)t
=
(= /a/) ⇒λyetλzet∃xe(y x ∧z x) ∨
(= /every/) ⇒(→(et)(et)t).
The noun phrase can be deﬁned by the axiom
NPs((et)t)t
=
Det ∗∗Noun ⇒I((et)(et)t)(et)(et)t ∨
Name ⇒λxeλyet(y x)
and the simple verb phrase (for the object of the third person in the singular
number) by the axioms
VPss(et)t
=
(Verbt ∗(= /s/) ∨((= /is/) ⇒/be/) ⊲VerbBe) ∗∗NP ⇒
λzeetλy(et)tλx2
e(y λx1(z x1 x2)) ∨
((= /does not/) ∗∗Verbt ∨((= /is not/) ⇒/be/) ⊲VerbBe) ∗∗NP ⇒
λzeetλy(et)tλx2
e(y λx1(∼(z x1 x2))),
where
(∗∗) =def λxsαtλysβt(x ∗(= / /) ∗y)
represents phrase concatenation (with a separating space). Note that the con-
stant VerbBe occurs here as a semantic rule applied to simple s-languages
which express the morphology of the verb ”be”. As these languages, as well
as the language represented by VerbBe itself are ﬁnite lexicons, the results
of the applications are lexicons too and hence conditions of the theorem 7.10
still hold for the language we are deﬁning. The compound verb phrase can
now be deﬁned by the axioms like
VPms(et)t
=
VPs ∗∗(= /and/) ∗∗VPs ⇒(∧(et)(et)et)) ∨
VPs ∗(= /,/) ∗∗VPm ⇒(∧(et)(et)et),
VPs(et)t
=
VPs ∨VPm
27

and the clause – by the axiom
Clstt = NP ∗∗VP ⇒I((et)t)(et)t.
Finally, the declarative sentence can be deﬁned by the axiom
Sstt = Cl ∗(= /./) ∨(Cl ∗(= /,/) ∗∗S ∨Cl ∗∗(= /and/) ∗∗S) ⇒(∧ttt).
If ∆S is the set of the above axioms, then, by propositions 7.6 - 7.8, we will
have, for example:
∆S
⊢
S /Jack builds a house./ ∃xe(Build xe Jack ∧House xe),
∆S
⊢
S /Jack sells a car and builds a house./ (∃xe(Sell xe Jack ∧Car xe) ∧
∃xe(Build xe Jack ∧House xe)),
∆S
⊢
S /Jack does not build a house./ ∼∃xe(Build xe Jack ∧House xe),
∆S
⊢
S /every builder builds a house./ (Builder →λx2
e∃x1
e(Build x1
e x2
e ∧House x1
e),
∆S
⊢
S /Jack is a builder, Jack builds a house./ (∃xe(Builder xe ∧Jack = xe) ∧
∃xe(Build xe Jack ∧House xe)).
Of course, along with these, the language represented by (∆S, S) also ad-
mits semantically infelicitous sentences like, for example, ”a house builds a
builder” or ”Jack is a house”. If one would like to make such sentences un-
grammatical, i.e. exclude them from the domain of the language represented
by (∆S, S), this can be achieved by applying more restrictive relational se-
mantic rules, than those simple functional rules used in the above axioms;
such rules must account the animacy categories of nouns, as well as categories
of subjects and objects applicable to a verb. Another, less elegant, though
practically may be simpler and more eﬃcient solution is to split lexicons
and derived languages to semantically homogenous components and allow
concatenation of only matching pairs, like, for example:
Clstt = (NPa ∗∗VPa ∨NPi ∗∗VPi) ⇒I((et)t)(et)t,
where NPa, NPi are to represent animate and inanimate noun phrases and
VPa, VPi to represent verb phrases applicable to animate and inanimate
subjects. Note that this approach leads to splitting the verb lexicon to com-
ponents corresponding diﬀerent generic sentence frames as deﬁned in (Fell-
baum, 1998); in particular, the verbs ”build” and ”sell”, in terms of WordNet,
will correspond the frame ”Somebody —-s something” and the verb ”be” will
be shared by the frames ”Something —-s something” and ”Somebody —-s
somebody”.
28

8
Context type, instructive and
context-dependent languages
Introduction of an additional sort of individuals in Ty2 of (Gallin, 1975) al-
lowed to accurately interpret in this theory the intensional logic (IL), that
implied interpretation of the corresponding type (s in Gallin’s notations, not
to be confused with the symbolic type of this work) as a set of possible “states
of world” or “states of aﬀairs”. Similarly to this, TyA
n with n > 2 admits
the same interpretation of one of its primitive types (let it be, for certainty,
c =def en−1) and thus turns out to be capable of representing intensional
languages, i.e. languages with intensional semantics, as well. In combination
with the capabilities provided by the symbolic type, however, a more speciﬁc
interpretation of type c in TyA
n allows to go far beyond this straightforward
generalization and achieve also a natural and eﬀective account of those as-
pects of a language which are usually referenced in literature as dynamic
semantics (Kamp, 1981; Heim, 1983; Seuren, 1985; Groenendijk & Stokhof,
1989; Groenendijk & Stokhof, 1990).
The basic idea is to extend TyA
n with non-logical axioms like
λxα(Derefαcα Sα (Pcc (Setrefααcc Sα xα yc))) = Iαα
(8.1)
Unsetαcc Sα ◦Pcc ◦Setrefααcc Sα xα = Icc,
(8.2)
where there could be some restrictions on the structure of terms Sα and Pcc
and
(◦(βγ)(αβ)αγ) =def λzβγλqαβλxα(zβγ (qαβ xα)),
that allow to interpret type c as a ”store” (Sabry, 1995) or, in the terminology
of programming languages, ”state” and transform a Tyn representation of a
language to the state-passing style (SPS) (Wadler, 1992; Sabry, 1995; Jones,
2003). In such a transformation the state actually plays a role of a context,
passing ”side eﬀects” of parsing some constituents of an expression to others,
as we explore in details below. This justiﬁes our referring to the type c as to
context type (and motivates the notation).
Note that cc-terms like Setrefααcc Sα Vα and Unsetαcc Sα present in-
structions to ”modify” a context, in the sense deﬁned by the axioms 8.1, 8.2.
Proceeding from this observation, one can further assume certain cc-terms to
denote instructions whose semantics might not be representable in TyA
n , but
still could be implemented in a computing or another system. Instructions
29

to add or remove a non-logical axiom to or from a set of axioms associated
with a context, or verify whether a given formula is provable from this set are
important examples of such “meta”-instructions. Although their semantics
are not representable within Tyn, they still might be denoted by cc terms,
like, say, Asserttcc At, Refutetcc At or Testtcc At, and there could be a
computing system capable of evaluating them in some conditions and pro-
viding an appropriate feedback in the event of failure. Other unrepresentable
instructions might force a system to exchange information with an external
environment via input/output devices or even to execute certain physical
actions (like robotic ones).
It is easy to notice that associating a context with a set of non-logical
axioms makes our c type conceptually similar to the World type of (Pollard,
2005). The principal technical (formal) diﬀerence is however that the World
type in the hyperintensional semantics is deﬁned as a derived subtype of the
type of functions from Prop to Bool, while Prop is introduced as a primitive
type. Unlike that, in our model, vice-versa, the context type c is introduced
as primitive and the propositional type can be deﬁned as the functional type
ct (see (Gallin, 1975)). A fundamental theoretical beneﬁt of the hyperin-
tensional semantics is that it admits internalizing (i.e. making representable
within the HOL) the entailment relation between propositions, along with
the property of a set of propositions to be an ultraﬁlter, i.e. a maximum
consistent set of propositions. However, as the World type is deﬁned just by
the ultraﬁlterhood predicate, i.e., informally saying, assumed to “settle every
issue” (Pollard, 2005), it is not obvious whether this theoretical beneﬁt would
imply practical beneﬁts in an implementation of this formalism. At the same
time, our context type, of course, enforces no assumptions about complete-
ness (and even about consistency) of axioms associated with a context, that
seems to be more pragmatic and realistic.
To summarize this introductory informal discussion, we can state that,
while type s of (Gallin, 1975) and type World of (Pollard, 2005) stand for
“states of world”, the similar to them type c of our model stands rather for
“states of an individual mind”, which mind is not necessarily complete nor
consistent, but, on one hand, still determines interpretation of a text and,
on the other hand, is changeable (in particular, extendable) in the process of
interpretation.
Moving on formalism, we ﬁrst note that a superposition like
P l
cc ◦P l−1
cc
... ◦P 1
cc,
30

represents a sequence of instructions, executed in order from right to left, that
is a program, while the identity Icc is the empty sequence, or ”do-nothing”
instruction. (Of course an arbitrary cc-term would not invariably represent
an executable instruction, but a real implementation should necessarily pro-
vide some sort of exception handling, reducing a non-executable instruction
to another or possibly do nothing instruction.)
Thus, expressions of a cc-language mean some (either executable or non-
executable) instructions and therefore a text, i.e. an ordered sequence of
such expressions can be treated as a corresponding program. A few obvious
features of such an instructive language make it diﬀerent in principle from a
t- and even a ct-language:
1. an instructive language text meaning captures the order of statements,
that is, its semantic interpretation can depend on that order;
2. it can also capture contradictory or equivalent truth meanings nested
in subsequent instructions;
3. it provides a natural way to distinctly represent declarative, interroga-
tive and imperative semantics.
Given an initial context Cc, an instructive language text meaning Pcc
determines a new context Pcc Cc depending on both the initial context Cc
and the program Pcc which changes it, in the sense that a continuation of the
text would already be applied to the new context. However, the program Pcc
itself here does not depend on the initial context. Our next step is to employ
the context type for building context-dependent languages.
Deﬁnition 8.1. A context-dependent α-language is a c(c × α)-language.
Given a context-dependent α-language L and a context term Cc, the
operation of context application
L ↓Cc =def L ⊲CA(Cc),
where the rule CA(Cc) ⊂Tc(c×α) ⊗Tc×α is represented by
CA(cc)(cα)cαt(Cc) =def λxccλycα((= xcc Cc) &(= ycα Cc)),
and the operation of context instantiation
L ⇓Cc =def L ⊲CI(Cc),
31

where the rule CI(Cc) ⊂Tc(c×α) ⊗Tα is represented by
CI(cc)(cα)αt(Cc) =def λxccλycα(= ycα Cc),
produce a c×α-language and a regular α-language, respectively, that depend
on a context Cc. Inversely, given a regular α-language and a term Fαcc, the
operation of context raising
L ⇑Fαcc =def L ⊲CR(Fαcc),
where the rule CR(Fαcc) ⊂Tα ⊗Tc(c×α) is represented by
CRα(cc)(cα)t(Fαcc) =def λxα((= Fαcc xα) &(= λxcxα)),
produces a context-dependent α-language. Note that for any language and
context
⊢(L ⇑λxαIcc) ⇓Cc = L,
that is, raising a regular language by λxαIcc converts it into a context-
dependent language which however is essentially equivalent to the original
one.
It is also noticeable that an instructive, that is a regular cc-language,
turns out to be a singular case of a context-dependent unit-type-language.
The reason why a context-dependent α-language is required to be of type
c(c × α), rather than of a simpler type cα, should become obvious from the
following. For sake of brevity we employ notation α =def c(c × α) (for an
arbitrary type α) everywhere below.
Deﬁnition 8.2. Let L be a context-dependent α-language and K - a context-
dependent β-language.
Then their anaphoric logical concatenation is the
context-dependent α × β-language
L −→∗K =def L ∗K ⊲AC,
where the rule AC ⊂Tα×β ⊗Tα×β is represented by the term
ACαβ α×βt =def λx1
ccλy1
cαλx2
ccλy2
cβ((= x2
cc ◦x1
cc) &(= y1
cα) &(= y2
cβ ◦x1
cc)),
and their cataphoric logical concatenation is the context-dependent α × β-
language
L ←−∗K =def L ∗K ⊲CC,
where the rule CC ⊂Tα×β ⊗Tα×β is represented by the term
CCαβ α×βt =def λx1
ccλy1
cαλx2
ccλy2
cβ((= x1
cc ◦x2
cc) &(= y1
cα ◦x2
cc) &(= y2
cβ)).
32

For informal interpretation of this deﬁnition consider the superposition
of an anaphoric concatenation with a context application:
(L −→∗K) ↓Cc = (L ∗K) ⊲(CA(Cc) ◦AC),
where the rule superposition CA(Cc) ◦AC is represented by the term
λx1
ccλy1
cαλx2
ccλy2
cβ((= x2
cc (x1
cc Cc)) &(= y1
cα Cc) &(= y2
cβ (x1
cc Cc))).
Thus, the anaphoric concatenation aﬀects a meaning of the right-hand con-
stituent by a context aﬀected by the left-hand one, while the latter is aﬀected
directly by the initial context. Symmetrically, for the cataphoric concatena-
tion, the eﬀective rule superposition is represented by the term
λx1
ccλy1
cαλx2
ccλy2
cβ((= x1
cc (x2
cc Cc)) &(= y1
cα (x2
cc Cc)) &(= y2
cβ Cc)),
that is, in this case an initial context is passed to the right-hand constituent
and the aﬀected context to the left-hand one.
Note that the construction of type α =def c(c × α) coincides with the
construction of the state monad type in functional programming languages
(Wadler, 1992; Jones, 2003) and the context raising rule
CRα(cc)(cα)t(λxαIcc) =def λxα((= Icc) &(= λxcxα))
precisely corresponds to the return operator of that monad. It is also easy
to verify that the rules ACαβ α×βt and CCαβ α×βt deﬁning operations −→∗and
←−∗come as results of binding by the corresponding operator of the same
monad, in the ﬁrst case – a meaning (x1
cc, y1
cα) of the left constituent with the
operation
AKα α×β =def λxα((x2
cc, λycxα, y2
cβ)
and in the second case – a meaning (x2
cc, y2
cβ) of the second constituent with
the symmetric operation
CKβ α×β =def λxβ((x1
cc, λycxβ, y1
cα),
which operations merely combine a monadic-type-meaning of one of the con-
stituents with a regular-type-meaning of the other. Of course, this note is
nothing else than a rephrasing of the above informal interpretation of oper-
ations −→∗and ←−∗, in terms of the state monad.
As the new operations −→∗, ←−∗, ↓, ⇑and ⇓are deﬁned as rule applications
to regular concatenations or just special rule applications, they also reveal
associativity and monotonicity properties:
33

Lemma 8.1. For any context-dependent α-languages K, L, a context-dependent
β-language M, regular α-languages K0, L0 and a context term Cc
(K ∪L) −→∗M
=
K −→∗M ∪L −→∗M,
M −→∗(K ∪L)
=
M −→∗K ∪M −→∗L,
(K ∪L) ←−∗M
=
K ←−∗M ∪L ←−∗M,
M ←−∗(K ∪L)
=
M ←−∗K ∪M ←−∗L,
(K0 ∪L0) ⇑Cc
=
K0 ⇑Cc ∪L0 ⇑Cc,
(K ∪L) ⇓Cc
=
K ⇓Cc ∪L ⇓Cc,
K ⊂L
=⇒
K −→∗M ⊂L −→∗M,
K ⊂L
=⇒
M −→∗K ⊂M −→∗L,
K ⊂L
=⇒
K ←−∗M ⊂L ←−∗M,
K ⊂L
=⇒
M ←−∗K ⊂M ←−∗L,
K0 ⊂L0
=⇒
K0 ⇑Cc ⊂L0 ⇑Cc,
K ⊂L
=⇒
K0 ⇓Cc ⊂L0 ⇓Cc.
Proposition 8.2. If a context-dependent α-language L has a pseudo-canonic
representation (∆, Lsαt) and a context-dependent β-language K has a pseudo-
canonic representation (∆, Ksβt), then the concatenations L −→∗K and L ←−∗K
have pseudo-canonic representations (∆, Lsαt −→∗Ksβt) and ((∆, Lsαt ←−∗Ksβt)
respectively, where
(−→∗(sαt)(sβt)sα×βt) =def λzsαtλzsβtλxsλxccλycαλycβ∃x1
s∃x2
s∃x1
cc∃x2
cc∃y2
cβ
(xs = x1
s +x2
s ∧xcc = x2
cc◦x1
cc ∧ycβ = y2
cβ◦x1
cc ∧zsαtx1
sx1
ccycα ∧zsβtx2
s x2
ccy2
cβ),
(←−∗(sαt)(sβt)sα×βt) =def λzsαtλzsβtλxsλxccλycαλycβ∃x1
s∃x2
s∃x1
cc∃x2
cc∃y1
cα
(xs = x1
s +x2
s ∧xcc = x1
cc◦x2
cc ∧ycα = y1
cα◦x2
cc ∧zsαtx1
s x1
ccy1
cα ∧zsβtx2
sx2
ccycβ).
Proof. The proof follows from Propositions 7.7, 7.8 and Deﬁnition 8.2, taking
into account that the terms ACαβ α×βt and CCαβ α×βt are canonic represen-
tations of the corresponding rules (in any domain).
34

Proposition 8.3. If a context-dependent α-language L has a pseudo-canonic
representation (∆, Lsαt), then a context instantiation L ⇓Cc has a pseudo-
canonic representation (∆, Lsαt ⇓Cc), where
(⇓(sαt)csαt) =def λz(sαt)csαtλzcλxsλyα∃xcc∃ycα(zsαt xs xcc ycα ∧yα = ycα zc).
Proof. The proof follows from Proposition 7.6, taking into account that the
term CAαcαt(Cc) is a canonic representation (in any domain) of the rule that
deﬁnes the context instantiation operation.
Proposition 8.4. If an α-language L has a pseudo-canonic representation
(∆, Lsαt), than a context raising L ⇑Fαcc has a pseudo-canonic representa-
tion (∆, Lsαt ⇑Fαcc), where
(⇑(sαt)(αcc)sαt) =def λzsαtλzαccλxsλxccλxcα∃xα
(zsαt xs xα ∧xcc = zαcc xα ∧xcα = λxcxα).
Proof. Similar to Proposition 8.3, with taking into account that the term
CRααt is a canonic representation (in any domain) of the rule that deﬁnes
the context raising operation.
Lemma 8.5. TyA
n operators of logical join, anaphoric or cataphoric concate-
nations and context instantiation or raising reproduce the associativity and
monotonicity properties:
⊢
(xsαt ∨ysαt) −→∗zsβt = xsαt −→∗zsβt ∨ysαt −→∗zsβt,
⊢
zsβt −→∗(xsαt ∨ysαt) = zsβt −→∗xsαt ∨zsβt −→∗ysαt,
⊢
(xsαt ∨ysαt) ←−∗zsβt = xsαt ←−∗zsβt ∨ysαt ←−∗zsβt,
⊢
zsβt ←−∗(xsαt ∨ysαt) = zsβt ←−∗xsαt ∨zsβt ←−∗ysαt,
⊢
(xsαt ∨ysαt) ⇑zαcc = xsαt ⇑zαcc ∨ysαt ⇑zαcc,
⊢
(xsαt ∨ysαt) ⇓zc = xsαt ⇓zc ∨ysαt ⇓zc,
⊢
(xsαt →ysαt) →(xsαt −→∗zsβt →ysαt −→∗zsβt),
⊢
(xsαt →ysαt) →(zsβt −→∗xsαt →zsβt −→∗ysαt),
⊢
(xsαt →ysαt) →(xsαt ←−∗zsβt →ysαt ←−∗zsβt),
⊢
(xsαt →ysαt) →(zsβt ←−∗xsαt →zsβt ←−∗ysαt),
⊢
(xsαt →ysαt) →(xsαt ⇑zαcc →ysαt ⇑zαcc),
⊢
(xsαt →ysαt) →(xsαt ⇓zc →ysαt ⇓zc).
35

Proof. The proof follows from the deﬁnitions of the operators and Lemma
7.9.
Propositions 8.2 – 8.4 and Lemmas 8.1 and 8.5 show that the main re-
sult of Section 7 – Theorem 7.10 – can be generalized in a straightforward
manner to the case of a recursive grammar that contains a mix of regular
and context-dependent languages and relations involving all seven operations
∪, ∗, −→∗, ←−∗, ⊲, ⇑and ⇓.
Let us see how the sample recursive grammar built in the previous section
can be converted to an instructive (and hence context-dependent) language
grammar and extended to acquire the two important features: distinction of
declarative and interrogative semantics and pronoun dereferencing. To avoid
excessive technical complexity and make the example more demonstrative,
we will allow pronoun ”he” to appear only on place of a clause subject,
referencing the subject of another (previous) clause expressed by a name, and
pronoun ”it” only on place of an object, referencing the object of another
(previous) aﬃrmative verb phrase. The ﬁrst can be achieved by deﬁning the
subject noun phrase by the axioms like
SNPs(et)tt
=
(Det ∗∗Noun ⇒I((et)(et)t)(et)(et)t) ⇑λx(et)tIcc ∨
(Name ⇒λxeλyet(y x)) ⇑Setref He(et)t) ∨
SPron ⇒(Icc, Deref ((et)t)c(et)t),
SPron(et)t
=
(= /he/) ⇒He(et)t.
Note that the constant He(et)t here does not denote any speciﬁc meaning, but
plays role of a symbol to assign a meaning and carry it to a corresponding
reference.
Accurate treatment of the pronoun on place of an object (which we want
to be capable of referencing an arbitrarily expressed object of another verb
phrase) requires a more sophisticated technique. First, we specialize the type
of the object noun phrase to (eet)et and deﬁne it by the axioms
ONPs(eet)ett
=
(NP ⇒O) ⇑λx(eet)etIcc ∨
(8.3)
OPron ⇒(Icc, Deref((eet)et)c(eet)et),
OPron(eet)et
=
(= /it/) ⇒It(eet)et,
where NP is deﬁned the same way as in the previous section and
O((et)t)(eet)et =def λn(et)tλveetλye(n λxe(v x y))
36

simply maps its (et)t meaning to (eet)et. Note that these deﬁnitions do not
yet provide setting the It reference. This is because in general case it should
be dereferenced to a meaning determined not only by the object noun phrase
itself, but also by a verb applied to it. For example, ”it” referencing the
object in the verb phrases ”builds a house” and ”sells a house” should be
dereferenced to diﬀerent meanings: ”a house which is built” and ”a house
which is sold”, respectively. Therefore, our It reference can be set only upon
processing the entire verb phrase, as captured in the following axiom:
VPssett
=
Verbt ∗(= /s/) ∗∗ONP ⇒(SetIt, Apply) ∨
(8.4)
((= /is/) ⇒/be/) ⊲VerbBe) ∗∗ONP ⇒
(λveetλxccλyc(eet)etIcc, Apply) ∨
((= /does not/) ∗∗Verbt ∨((= /is not/) ⇒/be/) ⊲VerbBe) ⇒
(λveetλxccλyc(eet)etIcc, ∼Apply),
where
SetIt
=def
λveetλxccλyc(eet)etλzc(Setref It λueet(y (x z) (v ∧u))),
Apply
=def
λveetλxccλyc(eet)etλzc(y (x z) v).
We shall see below how interaction of axioms 8.3 and 8.4 makes the correct
semantics, but so far have to complete our language deﬁnition.
The context-dependent versions of the compound declarative verb phrase,
clause and sentence can be deﬁned straightforward by the axioms
VPmsett
=
VPs ∗∗(= /and/) −→
∗∗VPs ⇒ρ (∧(et)(et)et)) ∨
VPs ∗(= /,/) −→
∗∗VPm ⇒ρ (∧(et)(et)et),
VPs(et)tt
=
VPs ∨VPm,
Clstt
=
SNP −→
∗∗VP ⇒ρ I((et)t)(et)t,
DSstt
=
Cl ∗(= /./) ∨(Cl ∗(= /,/) −→
∗∗DS ∨Cl ∗∗(= /and/) −→
∗∗DS) ⇒ρ (∧ttt),
where
(−→
∗∗) =def λxsαtλysβt x ∗(= / /) −→∗y,
and
ρ(αβ)αβ =def λzαβλyccλycα (ycc, λxc (z (ycα x))).
37

Now, to add the simplest (”yes/no”) interrogative sentence to our lan-
guage, we need the axioms like
IVPdosett
=
Verbt ∗∗ONP ⇒(SetIt, Apply),
IVPbesett
=
ONP ⇒(λxccλyc(eet)etIcc, Apply (=eet)),
IClstt
=
((= /does/) ∗∗SNP −→
∗∗IVPdo ∨(= /is/) ∗∗SNP −→
∗∗IVPbe) ⇒
ρ I((et)t)(et)t,
ISstt
=
ICl ∗(= /?/).
Finally, we wrap the declarative and interrogative sentences into the general
sentence of the instructive type:
Ss(cc)t
=
DS ⇒λyccλyct(Asserttcc ◦yct ◦ycc) ∨
(8.5)
IS ⇒λyccλyct(Testtcc ◦yct ◦ycc).
If now ∆S denotes the new set of axioms, then, due to the results of this
section and in the assumption that TyA
n has been extended by the axioms
8.1, 8.2, we will have, for example:
∆S
⊢
S /Jack is a builder./
(Assert ∃xe(Builder xe ∧Jack = xe) ◦Setref He Jack),
∆S
⊢
S /is Jack a builder?/
(Test ∃xe(Builder xe ∧Jack = xe) ◦Setref He Jack),
∆S
⊢
S /Jack is a builder, he builds a house./
(Assert (∃xe(Builder xe ∧Jack = xe) ∧
∃xe(Build xe Jack ∧House xe)) ◦Setref He Jack),
∆S
⊢
S /Jack builds a house and sells it./
(Assert (∃xe(Build xe Jack ∧House xe) ∧
∃xe((Build ∧Sell) xe Jack ∧House xe)) ◦
Setref It λueetλye∃xe((Build ∧ueet) xe ye ∧House xe) ◦
Setref He Jack).
Due to the metatheorem
⊢(∃xeA ∧∃xe(A ∧B)) = ∃xe(A ∧B),
38

where A and B are arbitrary formulas, the last derivation also implies a
shorter form
∆S
⊢
S /Jack builds a house and sells it./
(Assert (∃xe((Build ∧Sell) xe Jack ∧House xe)) ◦
Setref It λueetλye∃xe((Build ∧ueet) xe ye ∧House xe) ◦
Setref He Jack).
Similarly, we would have also
∆S
⊢
S /Every builder builds a house and sells it./
(Assert (Builder →λye∃xe((Build ∧Sell) xe ye ∧House xe)) ◦
Setref It λueetλye∃xe((Build ∧ueet) xe ye ∧House xe)).
The last examples give some hints on how this formalism could address don-
key pronouns (Geach, 1962; Kamp, 1981; Heim, 1982; Elbourne, 2006), re-
maining entirely within the mainstream higher-order logic semantics.
Of
course, elaboration of this topic deserves a separate publication.
Note that, due to the special semantic rules applied in the axiom 8.5, the
sentence meaning captures not only an assertion or test instruction, but also
all the ”side eﬀects” of its reading. This is essential in order to pass the side
eﬀects between sentences, if we would like to further deﬁne a language like
Texts(cc)t = S ∨S −→
∗∗Text ⇒(◦(cc)(cc)cc),
so that, if ∆S contains this last axiom too, then we would also have
∆S
⊢
Text /Jack is a builder. he builds a house./
(Assert ∃xe(Build xe Jack ∧House xe) ◦
Setref It λueetλye∃xe((Build ∧ueet) xe ye ∧House xe) ◦
Assert ∃xe(Builder xe ∧Jack = xe) ◦
Setref He Jack).
9
Translation/expression operators and
partial translation
Let an α-language L be represented by a term Lsαt and let w ∈A∗be a
non-ambiguous valid expression of this language, so that
⊢∃1xα(Lsαt /w/ xα).
39

Then, by the basic property of the description operator ι(αt)α,
⊢ι(αt)α(Lsαt /w/) = Aα,
where {Aα} is any generator of the meaning of w in L (for a product type
α =def β × γ here and below ι(αt)α denotes the pair
(λzβγt(ι(βt)β λxβ∃xγ(zβγt xβ xγ)), λzβγt(ι(γt)γ λxγ∃xβ(zβγt xβ xγ)))
(9.1)
which deﬁnition may be applied recursively). Similarly, if {Aα} is a generator
of a meaning which has a single expression w in L, then
⊢ι(st)sλxs(Lsαt xs Aα) = /w/.
Thus, given an α-language represented by a term Lsαt, the terms
τ(sαt)sα =def λxsαtλxs(ι(αt)α (xsαt xs))
and
σ(sαt)αs =def λxsαtλxα(ι(st)s λxs(xsαt xs xα))
enable Tyn representations of expression-to-meaning and meaning-to-expression
mapping determined by the language, in forms like τ(sαt)sα Lsαt and σ(sαt)αs Lsαt
respectively. They are referred to below as translation and expression oper-
ators.
Application of the translation operator to an invalid expression, of course,
is not provable to be equal to any meaning. However, it still represents a
meaning that the expression might acquire upon possible completion of the
language deﬁnition. Here is a precise formulation of this statement:
Proposition 9.1. Let (∆, Lsαt) be a pseudo-canonic representation of a lan-
guage L and
L+
sαt =def Lsαt ∨λxs(= τ(sαt)sα Lsαt xs).
(9.2)
If w is either a valid and non-ambiguous or invalid expression of L, then
∆⊢τ(sαt)sα L+
sαt /w/ = τ(sαt)sα Lsαt /w/.
Proof. If w is a non-ambiguous valid expression of L and Aα its meaning,
then
∆⊢Lsαt /w/ = (= Aα)
40

and
∆⊢ι(αt)α (Lsαt /w/) = Aα,
so that
∆⊢L+
sαt /w/ = Lsαt /w/.
Otherwise, if w is an invalid expression, then by Lemma 6.1
∆⊢Lsαt /w/ = λxαF,
so that
∆⊢L+
sαt /w/ = (= τ(sαt)sα Lsαt xs)
and therefore
∆⊢ι(αt)α (L+
sαt /w/) = τ(sαt)sα Lsαt xs.
Thus, the language deﬁned by (9.2) extends the language L with all and
only those pairs (w, τ(sαt)sαLsαt/w/) in which w is not a valid non-ambiguous
expression of L, while similar pairs in which w is such an expression are fully
contracted. In this sense, such a self-extension of a language L does not
add anything new to it. However, when a language is nested into another
language of a recursive grammar, employment of its self-extension enables
some new and useful features, as established by the following
Proposition 9.2. Let (∆, Lsαt) and (∆, Ksβt) be pseudo-canonic representa-
tions of languages L and K respectively and let uv be a single split of a word
w such that v is a valid expression of K.
If, additionally, v is a non-ambiguous expression of K with the meaning
Bβ and u an invalid expression of L, then
∆⊢τ(sαβt)s(α×β) (L+
sαt ∗K+
sβt) /w/ = (τ(sαt)sα Lsαt /u/, Bβ).
(9.3)
If, alternatively, uv is a single split of a word w such that u is valid
expression of L and, additionally, u is a non-ambiguous expression of L with
the meaning Aα and v - an invalid expression of K, then
∆⊢τ(sαβt)s(α×β) (L+
sαt ∗K+
sβt) /w/ = (Aα, τ(sβt)sβ Ksβt /v/).
(9.4)
41

Proof. In a similar way to the proof of Proposition 7.7, taking into account
Proposition 9.1, for the ﬁrst case we obtain
∆⊢(L+
sαt ∗K+
sβt) /w/ = (= τ(sαt)sα Lsαt /u/) &(= Bβ)
and for the second case
∆⊢(L+
sαt ∗K+
sβt) /w/ = (= Aα) &(= τ(sβt)sβ Ksβt /v/).
(9.3) and (9.4) follow from this according to (9.1).
The three features of the partial translations (9.3) and (9.4) worth noting
are:
1. they capture the correct overall structure of a precise meaning that the
concatenation would acquire upon elaboration of an incomplete nested
language;
2. they allow accurate restoration of their expressions uv = w even while
a nested language remains incomplete;
3. translation of only a single constituent is suﬃcient to convert a partial
translation to the full translation (Aα, Bβ) upon an elaboration of an
incomplete nested language.
For example, consider the self-extension
S+ =def S ∨λxs(= τ(stt)st S xs)
of the sample grammar we built in section 4. If ∆S denots the same set of
axioms as in that section, then we will have, for example:
∆S
⊢
S+ /Jack paints a house/
∃xe(τ(s(eet)t)eet Verbt /paint/ xe Jack ∧House xe),
∆S
⊢
S+ /Jack builds a computer/
∃xe(Build xe Jack ∧τ(s(et)t)et Noun /computer/ xe),
that illustrates both features 1 and 2. Now assume lexicon Noun be ex-
tended with an entry (= /computer/) ⇒Computeret and let ∆′
S denote
the changed axiom set. Then the derivation
∆′
S
⊢
∃xe(Build xe Jack ∧τ(s(et)t)et Noun /computer/ xe) =
∃xe(Build xe Jack ∧Computer xe)
42

follows immediately from
∆′
S ⊢Noun /computer/ = (= Computer),
that illustrates the feature 3.
10
Conclusion
In this work we studied some classes of languages that can be deﬁned entirely
in terms of provability in an extension (TyA
n ) of sorted type theory by inter-
preting one of its base types as symbolic, whose constants denote symbols of
an alphabet A or their concatenations. The symbolic type (s) is quite sim-
ilar to the phonological type of Higher Order Grammar (HOG) (Pollard &
Hana, 2003; Pollard, 2004; Pollard, 2006). However, the theory TyA
n diﬀers
from the logic of HOG in that it does not contain special types for syntactic
entities.
We launched from the two simple observations. First, given an arbitrary
consistent set ∆of non-logical axioms and a term of type sαt, one can deﬁne
an α-language, i.e. a relation between strings of symbols from alphabet A
and terms of type α, by the condition
∆⊢Lsαt /w/ Aα,
where /w/ stands for an s-term denoting a word (string) w ∈A∗. Secondly,
any Tyn-representable language, i.e.
a language that can be deﬁned this
way, necessarily possesses the semantic property of being logically closed,
meaning, loosely speaking, that the full semantic interpretation of every valid
expression of the language is given by a whole class of logically equivalent
terms.
Next, we proved that the inverse statement is also true, that is, every
logically closed language is Tyn-representable. This general result, however,
is not constructive in the sense that it does not provide an eﬀective procedure
of actually building a Tyn representation for a language deﬁned by a ﬁnite set
of rules or rule schemata. Our further eﬀorts therefore concentrated mainly
on ﬁnding such procedures for some important special classes of logically
closed languages.
We began this with deﬁnitions of α-lexicons and a special canonic rep-
resentation and proved that a language has a canonic representation if and
43

only if it is a lexicon. The canonic representation of a lexicon is eﬃciently
found from the description of the lexicon.
Then we deﬁned and investigated recursive grammars - a kind of trans-
formational grammars equipped with Tyn semantics.
We introduced Tyn
operators representing the basic language-construction operations used in
the recursive grammar rules and proved that a compact Tyn representation
for every language component of a recursive grammar comes from its rules
in a quite straightforward manner. We illustrated this technique by sim-
ple examples, from which it became clear that language components of a
recursive grammar stand for syntactic categories. We also brieﬂy discussed
classiﬁcation of recursively deﬁned Tyn-representable languages in terms of
Chomsky hierarchy and on this basis indicated some conditions of when such
languages turn out to be decidable, in spite of the fact that Tyn is undecidable
and hence so are generally Tyn-representable languages.
Then we moved to a further specialization of TyA
n by introducing the con-
text type (c), which can be interpreted as a ”store” or ”state” and thus is simi-
lar to ”state of aﬀairs” or ”World” types of (Gallin, 1975) and (Pollard, 2005),
respectively. We showed that our interpretation allows to model not only lan-
guages with intensional semantics (as in the above referenced works), but also
so called instructive and context dependent languages. The latter come in our
formalism in result of transformation of an α-language to state-passing style
(SPS) (Wadler, 1992; Sabry, 1995; Jones, 2003) c(c × α)-language, which
enables passing ”side eﬀects” of parsing some text constituents to others.
An instructive, i.e. a cc-language can be considered as a context dependent
transformation of a unit-type language and provides semantic features that
principally could not be modeled by a regular t-language nor by its intensional
(ct) transformation. We found Tyn representations of context-dependent lan-
guage construction operations (anaphoric and cataphoric concatenations and
context raising and instantiation) that allow generalization of the previous re-
sults for context-dependent languages. We demonstrated how this formalism
can address pronoun anaphora resolution.
Finally, we deﬁned translation and expression TyA
n operators and intro-
duced a special language representation (self-extension), revealing a useful
property of partial translation.
The proposed formalism eﬃciently addresses the known issues inherent
in the two-component language models and also partially inherited by HOG.
Indeed,
44

1. as there are no restrictions on a type of meanings of a Tyn-representable
language or a component of it, which type, in particular, can be con-
structed with use of the symbolic type too, such a language can gen-
erally express facts about itself or about another Tyn-representable
language;
2. the property of partial translation of a self-extensible Tyn language
representation demonstrates its built-in lexical robustness;
3. as syntactic categories are not captured in the Tyn logic, but intro-
duced only in non-logical axioms deﬁning a concrete language, the Tyn
representation provides full structural robustness and ﬂexibility.
These results have both theoretical and practical implications. First, they
facilitate modeling of such fundamental abilities associated with the human
language acquisition process like communication of new grammar rules and
lexical entries directly in an (already acquired) sub-set of the object language
and independently acquiring new lexical entries upon encountering them in
a known context, with postponed acquisition of their exact meanings. Other
possible applications of the proposed formalism may include:
1. addressing donkey pronouns (Geach, 1962; Kamp, 1981; Heim, 1982;
Elbourne, 2006) and other dynamic semantic phenomena entirely within
the mainstream higher-order logic semantics, as it was preliminarily
outlined in section 8;
2. modeling advanced language self-learning mechanisms, for example,
such like deriving or generalization of grammar rules from text samples
(may be accompanied by their semantic interpretation, communicated
by other means or just expressed diﬀerently in the same language),
that might be reduced, in frame of this formalism, to a problem of
higher-order uniﬁcation (Gardent et al., 1997; Dougherty & Mart´ınez,
2004).
Finally, an implementation of the proposed formalism, like that suggested
in (Gluzberg & Brenner, 2006), should provide a platform for building NLP
systems with the following powerful features:
1. the ability to recursively deﬁne more complex or more comprehensive
languages in terms of previously deﬁned simpler or limited ones;
45

2. automatically acquiring new lexical entries in the process of operation;
3. storing partial text parses which can be automatically completed later,
upon extending the used language deﬁnition;
4. freely switching between diﬀerent input and output languages to access
the same semantic content.
