Model-Based Action Exploration for Learning Dynamic Motion Skills
Glen Berseth and Michiel van de Panne
University of British Columbia
Abstract— Deep reinforcement learning has achieved great
strides in solving challenging motion control tasks. Recently,
there has been signiﬁcant work on methods for exploiting
the data gathered during training, but there has been less
work on how to best generate the data to learn from. For
continuous action domains, the most common method for gen-
erating exploratory actions involves sampling from a Gaussian
distribution centred around the mean action output by a policy.
Although these methods can be quite capable, they do not
scale well with the dimensionality of the action space, and
can be dangerous to apply on hardware. We consider learning
a forward dynamics model to predict the result, (xt+1), of
taking a particular action, (u), given a speciﬁc observation
of the state, (xt). With this model we perform internal look-
ahead predictions of outcomes and seek actions we believe
have a reasonable chance of success. This method alters the
exploratory action space, thereby increasing learning speed and
enables higher quality solutions to difﬁcult problems, such as
robotic locomotion and juggling.
Efﬁcient action exploration remains a challenge for Rien-
forcement Learning (RL), especially in continuous action
domains. Gaussian distributions are commonly used to model
the stochastic component of control policies in continuous
action spaces. However, as the number of action dimensions
increase the probability of randomly generating an action
that is better than the current policy decreases exponentially
with the action dimension.
Recent work has indicated that methods that add local
noise might not be enough to explore environments well [1].
Other methods model the action distribution better by learn-
ing a noise distribution [2] or processing random Gaussian
noise through the policy [3]. However, these methods may
not scale well with respect to the number of action dimen-
sions. In practise, we expect that there likely exists better
distributions that will focus the sampled actions to areas
of the action space that appear more promising. This is of
particular importance to problems where data collection is
expensive, like robotics.
We want to generate exploratory actions that have a greater
probability of leading the policy to higher value states. We
do this in a model-based way, using a learned model of
the environment’s transition probability ˆP(xt+1|xt, ut, θ ˆ
P ).
The model is used to predict outcomes of taking actions
in particular states. Predicted states are rated, via the value
function, for how well it is believed the policy will perform
from that state onward. This method is similar to how a
person might use an internal understanding of the result
of taking an action and modifying that action to increase
the utility (or cumulative reward) of their future. We call
this method Model-Based Action Exploration (MBAE). This
work is a step towards mixing model-based and model-free
(a) Membrane Hardware
(b) Membrane Simulation
Fig. 1: (a) The Membrane robot. The blue points between
the parallel links are actuated up and down via the servos on
the bottom. Each point is connected together with a passive
slider, together they form a Membrane-like system. Right:
Simulated model of Membrane robot.
learning. We use a model-based method to assist action
exploration and model-free methods for training. We note
that MBAE should be used in conjunction with off-policy
algorithms.
Our work is motivated by the desire to solve more complex
simulated and robotic tasks. The mathematical framework is
inspired by Deterministic Policy Gradient (DPG) [4] where
action gradients can be computed for the policy given an
action-value (Q) function However, in practise these gra-
dients are noisy and can vary greatly in their magnitude.
This can make it challenging to create a stable learning
framework. In a sense, in MBAE we are passing these
gradients through the environment as an extra means of
validation, thereby decreasing the bias and increasing the
stability of learning. This work is also motivated by the idea
that the signiﬁcant body of data collected while training an
RL policy should be leveraged for additional purposes.
I. RELATED WORK
a) Reinforcement Learning: The environment in a RL
problem is often modelled as an Markov Dynamic Processes
(MDP) with a discrete set of states and actions [5]. In this
work we are focusing on problems with inﬁnite/continuous
state and action spaces. These include complex motor control
tasks that have become a popular benchmark in the machine
learning literature [6]. Many recent RL approaches are based
on policy gradient methods [7] where the gradient of the
arXiv:1801.03954v2  [cs.AI]  12 Apr 2018

policy with respect to future discounted reward is approx-
imated and used to update the policy. Recent advances in
combining policy gradient methods and deep learning have
led to impressive results for numerous problems, including
Atari games and bipedal motion control [8], [9], [10], [11],
[12], [13].
b) Sample Efﬁcient RL: While policy gradient methods
provide a general framework for how to update a policy given
data, it is still a challenge to generate good data. Sample efﬁ-
cient RL methods are an important area of research as learn-
ing complex policies for motion control can take days and
physically simulating on robots is time-consuming. Learning
can be made more sample efﬁcient by further parameterizing
the policy and passing noise through the network as an
alternative to adding vanilla Gaussian noise [3], [2]. Other
work encourages exploration of the state space that has not
yet been seen by the agent [14]. There has been success
in incorporating model-based methods to generate synthetic
data or locally approximate the dynamics [15], [16], [17].
Two methods are similar to the MBAE work that we propose.
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (Deep Deterministic
Policy Gradient (DDPG)) is a method that directly links
the policy and value function, propagating gradients into the
policy from the value function [4]. Another is Stochastic
Value Gradients (SVG), a framework for blending between
model-based and model-free learning [18]. However, these
methods do not use the gradients as a method for action
exploration.
c) Model-Based RL: generally refers to methods that
use the structure of the problem to assist learning. Typically
any method that uses more than a policy and value function
is considered to fall into this category. Signiﬁcant improve-
ments have been made recently by including some model-
based knowledge into the RL problem. By ﬁrst learning a
policy using model-based RL and then training a model-free
method to act like the model-based method [19] signiﬁcant
improvements are achieved. There is also interest in learning
and using models of the transition dynamics to improve
learning [20]. The work in [16] uses model-based policy
optimization methods along with very accurate dynamics
models to learn good policies. In this work, we learn a model
of the dynamics to compute gradients to maximize future
discounted reward for action exploration. The dynamics
model used in this work does not need to be particularly
accurate as the underlying model-free RL algorithm can cope
with a noisy action distribution.
II. FRAMEWORK
In this section we outline the MDP based framework used
to describe the RL problem.
A. Markov Dynamic Process
An MDP is a tuple consisting of {S, A, R(·), P(·), γ}.
Here S is the space of all possible state conﬁgurations and A
is the set of available actions. The reward function R(u, x)
determines the reward for taking action u ∈A in state x ∈S.
The probability of ending up in state xt+1 ∈S after taking
action u in state x is described by the transition dynamics
function P(xt+1|x, u). Lastly, the discount factor γ ∈(0, 1]
controls the planning horizon and gives preference to more
immediate rewards. A stochastic policy π(u|x) models the
probability of choosing action u given state x. The quality
of the policy can be computed as the expectation over future
discounted rewards for the given policy starting in state x0
and taking action u0.
Jπ(x0, u0) = Eπ[R(u0, x0) + γR(u1, x1) + . . . + γT R(uT , xT )]
Jπ(x0, u0) = Eπ[
T
X
t=0
γtR(ut, xt)]
(1)
The actions ut over the trajectory (u0, x0, . . . , uT , xT ) are
determined by the policy π(ut, xt). The successor state xt+1
is determined by the transition function P(xt+1|xt, ut).
B. Policy Learning
The state-value function Vπ(x) estimates Eq. 1 starting
from state x0 for the policy π(·). The action-valued function
Qπ(x, u) models the future discounted reward for taking
action u in state x and following policy π(·) thereafter.
The advantage function is a measure of the beneﬁt of
taking action u in state x with respect to the current policy
performance.
Aπ(x, u) = Qπ(x, u) −Vπ(x)
(2)
The advantage function is then used as a metric for improv-
ing the policy.
u∗= arg max log π(u|x)Aπ(x, u)
(3)
C. Deep Reinforcement Learning
During each episode of interaction with the environment,
data is collected for each action taken, as an experience tuple
τi = (xi, ui, ri, x′
i).
1) Exploration: In continuous spaces the stochastic policy
π(u|x) is often modeled by a Gaussian distribution with
mean µ(x|θµ). The standard deviation can be modeled by
a state-dependent neural network model, σ(x|θσ), or can be
state independent and sampled from N(0, Σ).
2) Exploitation: We train a neural network to model the
value function on data collected from the policy. The loss
function used to train the value function (Vπ(x|θv)) is the
temporal difference error:
L(θv) = E[r + γVπ(xt+1|θv)] −Vπ(x|θv)].
(4)
Using the learned value function as a baseline, the advantage
function can be estimated from data. With an estimate of
the policy gradient, via the advantage, policy updates can
be performed to increase the policy’s likelihood of selecting
actions with higher advantage:
θπ ←θπ + α∇θπ log π(u|x, θπ)Aπ(x, u, θv)
(5)

III. MODEL-BASED ACTION EXPLORATION
In model-based RL we are trying to solve the same
policy parameter optimization as in Eq. 3. To model the
dynamics, we train one model to estimate the reward function
and another to estimate the successor state. The former is
modeled as a direct prediction, while the latter is modeled
as a distribution from which samples can be drawn via a
GAN (generative adversarial network).
A. Stochastic Model-Based Action Exploration
A diagram of the MBAE method is shown in Figure 2.
With the combination of the transition probability model and
a value function, an action-valued function is constructed.
Using MBAE, action gradients can be computed and used
for exploration.
r+ V(x')
Q(x,u)
P(x,u)
(x)
 
u
Q-value
x
x
r,x'
x
γ
Fig. 2: Schematic of the Model-Based Action Exploration
design. States x are generated from the simulator, the policy
produces an action u, x and u are used to predict the next
state xt+1. The gradient is computed back through the value
function to give the gradient of the state ∇xt+1 that is then
used to compute a gradient that changes the action by ∆u
to produce a predicted state with higher value.
By using a stochastic transition function the gradients
computed by MBAE are non-deterministic. Algorithm 1
shows the method used to compute action gradients when
predicted future states are sampled from a distribution. We
use a Generative Advasarial Network (GAN) [21] to model
the stochastic distribution. Our implementation closely fol-
lows [22] that uses a Conditional Generative Advasarial Net-
work (cGAN) and combines a Mean Squared Error (MSE)
loss with the normal GAN loss. We expect the simulation
dynamics to have correlated terms, which the GAN can learn.
Algorithm 1 Compute Action Gradient
1: function GETACTIONDELTA(xt)
2:
ˆut ←π(u|xt, θπ)
3:
η ←N(0, 1.0)
4:
ˆxt+1 ←ˆP(xt+1|xt, ˆut, η, θ ˆ
P )
5:
∇ˆxt+1 ←∇xt+1Vπ(ˆxt+1|θv)
6:
ˆut ←ˆut + αu∇ˆut ˆPµ(∇ˆxt+1|xt, ˆut, η, θ ˆ
Pµ)
7:
return ˆut
8: end function
αu is a learning rate speciﬁc to MBAE and η is the random
noise sample used by the cGAN. This exploration method
can be easily incorporated into RL algorithms. The pseudo
code for using MBAE is given in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 MBAE algorithm
1: Randomly initialize model parameters
2: while not done do
3:
while Simulate episode do
4:
if generate exploratory action then
5:
ut ←π(u|xt, θπ)
6:
if Uniform(0, 1) < p then
7:
ut ←ut+ GetActionDelta(xt)
8:
end if
9:
else
10:
ut ←µ(xt|θµ)
11:
end if
12:
end while
13:
Sample batch {τj = (xj, uj, rj, x′
j)} from D
14:
Update value function, policy and transition proba-
bility given {τj}
15: end while
B. DYNA
In practise the successor state distribution produced from
MBAE will differ from the environment’s true distribu-
tion. To compensate for this difference we perform addi-
tional training updates on the value function, replacing the
successive states in the batch with ones produced from
ˆP(·|xt, ut, η, θ ˆ
P ). This helps the value function better esti-
mate future discounted reward for states produced by MBAE.
This method is similar to DYNA (DYNA) [23], [17], but
here we are performing these updates for the purposes of
conditioning the value function on the transition dynamics
model.
IV. CONNECTIONS TO POLICY GRADIENT METHODS
Action-valued functions can be preferred because they
model the effect of taking speciﬁc actions and can also
implicitly encode the policy. However, performing a value
iteration update over the all actions is intractable in contin-
uous action spaces.
L(θ) = E[r+γ max
u′∈A Qπ(xt+1)(xt+1, u′, θ)−Qπ(x|θπ)(x, u, θ)]
(6)
DPG [24] compensates for this issue by linking the value
and policy functions together allowing for gradients to be
passed from the value function through to the policy. The
policy parameters are then updated to increase the action-
value function returns. This method has been successful [25]
but has stability challenges [26].
More recently SVG [18] has been proposed as a method
to unify model-free and model-based methods for learning
continuous action control policies. The method learns a
stochastic policy, value function and stochastic model of the
dynamics that are used to estimate policy gradients. While
SVG uses a similar model to compute gradients to optimize
a policy, here we use this model to generate more informed
exploratory actions.

V. RESULTS
MBAE is evaluated on a number of tasks, including:
Membrane robot simulation of move-to-target and stack-
ing, Membrane robot hardware move-to-target, OpenAIGym
HalfCheetah, OpenAIGym 2D Reacher, 2D Biped simulation
and N-dimensional particle navigation. The supplementary
video provides a short overview of these systems and tasks.
The method is evaluated using the Continuous Actor Critic
Learning Automaton (CACLA) stochastic policy RL learning
algorithm [11]. CACLA updates the policy mean using MSE
for actions that have positive advantage.
A. N-Dimensional Particle
This environment is similar to a continuous action space
version of the common grid world problem. In the grid world
problem the agent (blue dot) is trying to reach a target
location (red dot), shown in the left of Figure 3a. In this
version the agent receives reward for moving closer to its
goal (r = ||agentpos−targetpos||2). This problem is chosen
because it can be extended to an N-dimensional world very
easily, which is helpful as a simple evaluation of scalability
as the action-space dimensionality increases. We use a 10D
version here [27], [28].
Figure 3 shows a visualization of a number of components
used in MBAE. In Figure 5a we compare the learning curves
of using a standard CACLA learning algorithm and one
augmented with MBAE for additional action exploration.
The learning curves show a signiﬁcant improvement in
learning speed and policy quality over the standard CACLA
algorithm. We also evaluated the impact of pre-training the
deterministic transition probability model for MBAE. This
pre-training did not provide noticeable improvements.
B. 2D Biped Imitation
In this environment the agent is rewarded for developing
a 2D walking gait. Reward is given for matching an overall
desired velocity and for matching a given reference motion.
This environment is similar to [29]. The 2D Biped used in
the simulation is shown in Figure 4a.
In Figure 5b, ﬁve evaluations are used for the 2D Biped
and the mean learning curves are shown. In this case MBAE
consistently learns 5 times faster than the standard CACLA
algorithm. We further ﬁnd that the use of MBAE also leads
to improved learning stability and more optimal policies.
C. Gym and Membrane Robot Examples
We evaluate MBAE on two environments from ope-
nAIGym, 2D Reacher Figure 4b and HalfCheetah Figure 4c.
MBAE does not signiﬁcantly improve the learning speed
for the 2D Reacher. However, it results in a higher value
policy Figure 5c. For the HalfCheetah MBAE provides a
signiﬁcant learning improvement Figure 5d, resulting in a
ﬁnal policy with more than 3 times the average reward.
Finally, we evaluate MBAE on a simulation of the juggling
Membrane robot shown in Figure 1a. The under-actuated
system with complex dynamics and regular discontinuities
due to contacts make this a challenging problem. The results
(a) Nav environment and current policy
(b) transition probability error
(c) MBAE direction
Fig. 3: The ﬁgure (a) left is the current layout of the
continuous grid world. The agent is blue and target location
for the agent is the red dot and the green boxes are obstacles.
In (a) right, the current policy is shown as if the agent was
located at each arrow action to give the unit direction of
the action. The current value at each state is visualized by
the colour of the arrows, red being the highest. In (b) the
error of the forward dynamics model is visualized as the
distance between the successive state predicted and the actual
successive states ((x + u) −ˆP(x, u)). (c) is the unit length
action gradient from MBAE. Only the ﬁrst two dimensions
of the state and action are visualized here.
(a) 2D Biped
(b) 2D Reacher
(c) HalfCheetah
Fig. 4: Additional environments MBAE is evaluated on.

for two tasks that include attempting to stack one box on
top of another and a second task to move a ball to a target
location are shown in Figure 5f and
Figure 5e. For both
these environments the addition of MBAE provides only
slight improvements. We believe that due to the complexity
of this learning task, it is difﬁcult to learn a good policy
for this problem in general. The simulated version of the
membrane-stack task is shown in Figure 6c.
We also asses MBAE on the Membrane robot shown
in Figure 1a. OpenCV is used to track the location of a ball
that is affected by the actuation of 5 servos that cause 5 pins
to move linearly, shown in Figure 6b. The 5 pins are con-
nected by passive prismatic joints that form the membrane.
The robot begins each new episode by resetting itself which
involves tossing the ball up and randomly repositioning the
membrane. Please see the accompanying video for details.
We transfer the movetotarget policy trained in simulation
for use with the Membrane robot. We show the results of
training on the robot with and without MBAE for ∼3 hours
each in Figure 6a. Our main objective here is to demonstrate
the feasibility of learning on the robot hardware; our current
results are only from a single training run for each case. With
this caveat in mind, MBAE appears to support improved
learning. We believe that this is related to the transition
probability model adjusting to the new state distribution of
the robot quickly.
D. Transition Probability Network Design
We have experimented with many network designs for the
transition probability model. We have found that using a
DenseNet [30] works well and increases the models accuracy.
We use dropout on the input and output layers, as well as the
inner layers, to reduce overﬁtting. This makes the gradients
passed through the transition probability model less biased.
VI. DISCUSSION
a) Exploration Action Randomization and Scaling:
Initially, when learning begins, the estimated policy gradient
is ﬂat, making MBAE actions ∼0. As learning progresses
the estimated policy gradient gets sharper leading to actions
produced from MBAE with magnitude >> 1. By using a
normalized version of the action gradient, we maintain a
reasonably sized explorative action, this is similar to the
many methods used to normalize gradients between layers
for deep learning [31], [32]. However, with normalized
actions, we run the risk of being overly deterministic in
action exploration. The addition of positive Gaussian noise
to the normalized action length helps compensate for this.
Modeling the transition dynamics stochasticity allows us to
generate future states from a distribution, further increasing
the stochastic nature of the action exploration.
b) transition probability Model Accuracy: Initially, the
models do not need to be signiﬁcantly accurate. They only
have to perform better than random (Gaussian) sampling. We
found it important to train the transition probability model
while learning. This allows the model to adjust and be most
accurate for the changing state distribution observed during
training. This makes it more accurate as the policy converges.
c) MBAE Hyper Parameters: To estimate the policy
gradient well and to maintain reasonably accurate value esti-
mates, Gaussian exploration should still be performed. This
helps the value function get a better estimate of the current
policy performance. From empirical analysis, we have found
that sampling actions from MBAE with a probability of 0.25
has worked well across multiple environments. The learning
progress can be more sensitive to the action learning rate
αu. We found that annealing values between 1.0 and 0.1
MBAE assisted learning. The form of normalization that
worked the best for MBAE was a form of batchnorm, were
we normalize the action standard deviation to be similar to
the policy distribution.
One concern could be that MBAE is beneﬁting mostly
from the extra training that is being seen for the value
function. We performed an evaluation of this effect by
training MBAE without the use of exploratory actions from
MBAE. We found no noticeable impact on the learning speed
or ﬁnal policy quality.
A. Future Work
It might still be possible to further improve MBAE by
pre-training the transition probability model ofﬂine. As well,
learning a more complex transition probability model similar
to what has been done in [16] could improve the accuracy
of the MBAE generated actions. It might also be helpful to
learn a better model of the reward function using a method
similar to [33]. One challenge is the addition of another step
size α for how much action gradient should be applied to
the policy action, and it can be non-trivial to select this step
size.
While we believe that the MBAE is promising, the learn-
ing method can suffer from stability issues when the value
function is inaccurate, leading to poor gradients. We are
currently investigating methods to limit the KL divergence
of the policy between updates. These constraints are gaining
popularity in recent RL methods [34]. This should reduce
the amount the policy shifts from parameter updates, further
increasing the stability of learning. The Membrane related
tasks are particularly difﬁcult to do well on; even after
signiﬁcant training the policies could still be improved.
Lastly, while our focus has been on evaluating the method on
many environments, we would also like to evaluate MBAE
in the context of additional RL algorithms, such as PPO or
Q-Prop, to further assess its beneﬁt.
