Towards organizational guidelines for 
the responsible use of AI 
Richard Benjamins1 
 
Abstract.1  In the past few years, several large companies have 
published ethical principles of Artificial Intelligence (AI). National 
governments, the European Commission, and inter-governmental 
organizations have come up with requirements to ensure the good 
use of AI. However, individual organizations that want to join this 
effort, are faced with many unsolved questions. This paper proposes 
guidelines for organizations committed to the responsible use of AI, 
but lack the required knowledge and experience. The guidelines 
consist of two parts: i) helping organizations to decide what 
principles to adopt, and ii) a methodology for implementing the 
principles in organizational processes. In case of future AI 
regulation, organizations following this approach will be well-
prepared.  
1 
INTRODUCION 
The popularization of AI has led to numerous applications such as 
content recommendation, chatbots, facial recognition, machine 
translation, fraud detection, medical diagnosis, etc. However, there 
are also risks associated to the massive uptake of AI such as unfair 
discrimination and opaque algorithmic decisions.  
Those risks have motivated a range of organizations to come up 
with AI principles or ethics guidelines. The objective of this paper 
is to provide guidance to individual organizations in defining and 
implementing AI principles. Section 2 presents an overview of 
current principles. Section 3 proposes a three-step approach to zoom 
in on appropriate principles for an organization. Section 4 presents 
a methodology to implement the chosen principles into 
organizational structures. Finally, Section 5 provides conclusions. 
2 
PROLIFERATION OF AI PRINCIPLES 
In the past three years, the amount of organizations publishing AI 
principles has grown significantly, including governments, private 
companies, civil societies, inter-governmental organizations and 
multi-stakeholder initiatives. There is general agreement on what 
principles are relevant for controlling AI. [1] gives an overview of 
more than thirty organizations with their respective principles 
classified into nine broad categories: human rights, human values, 
responsibility, human control, fairness & non-discrimination, 
transparency & explainability, safety & security, accountability, and 
privacy. Algorithm Watch maintains an open directory with AI 
principles of over 80 organizations [2], and [3] performed a global 
analysis of the AI principles of 84 organizations.  
 

The European Commission has published its Ethics Guidelines 
for Trustworthy AI consisting of seven requirements [4]. Several 
governments have stated AI principles related to the future of work, 
liability of self-learning autonomous systems, malicious use, data 
monopolies & concentration of wealth. All in all, there is a large set 
of principles to choose from, yet there is little experience in what 
principles to choose and how to integrate them into organizational 
processes. 
3 
A THREE-STEP APPROACH TO FOCUS 
ON THE RELEVANT PRINCIPLES 
Figure 1 provides an illustration of the many AI principles 
organizations can choose from. The following simple process can 
help to choose from the long list of principles.  
1) Distinguish between principles relevant for governments, 
such as the future of work, lethal autonomous weapon systems, 
liability, concentration of power & wealth (right part of Figure 1), 
and principles that individual organizations (including private and 
public enterprises, public bodies, and civil societies) can act on, such 
as privacy, security, fairness and transparency (left part of Figure 1).  
2) 
Distinguish 
between 
intended 
and 
unintended 
consequences. Many challenges of the use of AI are occurring as an 
unintended side effect of the technology (e.g. bias, lack of 
explainability, future of work, see top part of Figure 1). Intended 
consequences are explicit decisions and can be controlled, such 
using AI for good or for bad (bottom part of Figure 1). It is likely 
that with time, when organizations become more aware and capable 
of mitigating unintended consequences, those might become 
considered as intended if they continue to appear. Organizations 
better formulate their principles for the unintended consequences 
they can act upon (top left quadrant of Figure 1). 
Figure 1. Classification of AI Principles along two dimensions: company-
government (continuous) and unintended-intended. 

 
3) Consider whether the AI Principles cover all aspects relevant 
for AI systems (e.g. safety, privacy, security, fairness, etc.) in an 
end-to-end manner, versus covering only AI-specific challenges 
(e.g. fairness, explainability, human agency). There is no hard line 
between those categories, but it is a continuum, as illustrated in 
Figure 2. 
The decisions organizations take will be partly based on the 
sector they are in. For example, using AI in the aviation sector will 
put high value on safety, whereas the insurance sector will put high 
value on fairness and explainability.  
 
 
4 
Responsible AI by Design 
It is one thing to define the appropriate AI Principles, but it is another 
thing to make them part of “business as usual”. In [5], we present 
such a methodology called “Responsible AI by Design”. The 
methodology has five ingredients and is illustrated here with the case 
of Telefonica. 
1) Telefonica’s AI Principles state that the use of AI should be 
fair, transparent & explainable, human-centered, with privacy & 
security, which also applies to providers of AI solutions [6]. The 
Principles have been defined in a multi-departmental initiative based 
on existing literature and sectorial considerations.   
2) It is important to provide training to employees explaining all 
relevant aspects. Figure 3 illustrates the modules of an online course 
developed by Telefonica. The content of the course is adapted to the 
technical savviness of employees. 
 
 
3) When designing, developing or buying AI systems, employees 
need to complete an online questionnaire with a set of questions 
and recommendations2 corresponding to each principle. The 
 
2 In contrast to the Assessment list for Trustworthy AI of the EC [4], that 
does not provide recommendations, but only asks questions.  
3 http://aif360.mybluemix.net/  
questionnaire has been developed by AI experts in collaboration 
with Human Rights experts. All questionnaires are logged for 
governance reasons.  
4) Tools are important for supporting automatic checking for bias 
in the data, mitigating potentially discriminatory algorithmic 
outcomes, finding proxy variables to sensitive variables, explainable 
AI for backbox algorithms, and data anonymization. Some of the 
tools are internally built while others are open source tools such as 
AI Fairness 3603 and InterpretML4.  
5) A governance model defines responsibilities and the 
escalation process when the questionnaire reveals issues. We 
identified a new role called Responsible AI Champion for discussing 
potential issues. If not resolved, there are two levels of escalation: a 
multi-disciplinary team of experts, and our Responsible Business 
Office. 
5 
CONCLUSIONS 
We have proposed an approach for the problem many organizations 
face when defining and implementing AI Principles. This problem 
has been recognized by the author in numerous discussions with 
organizations and is also evidenced by the pilot of the EC assessment 
list for trustworthy AI. Several AI experts of the HLEG5 have 
confirmed the value of the presented approach for helping 
organizations move towards an ethical use of Artificial Intelligence.  
6
