AliMe Assist: An Intelligent Assistant for Creating an Innovative
E-commerce Experience
Feng-Lin Li, Minghui Qiu, Haiqing Chen, Xiongwei Wang, Xing Gao, Jun Huang, Juwei Ren,
Zhongzhou Zhao, Weipeng Zhao, Lei Wang, Guwei Jin, Wei Chu
Alibaba Group

ABSTRACT
We present AliMe Assist, an intelligent assistant designed for cre-
ating an innovative online shopping experience in E-commerce.
Based on question answering (QA), AliMe Assist oﬀers assistance ser-
vice, customer service, and chating service. It is able to take voice
and text input, incorporate context to QA, and support multi-round
interaction. Currently, it serves millions of customer questions per
day and is able to address 85% of them. In this paper, we demon-
strate the system, present the underlying techniques, and share our
experience in dealing with real-world QA in the E-commerce ﬁeld.
KEYWORDS
Qestion Answering, Convolutional Neural Network, Knowledge
Graph, Semantic Normalization, Sequence-to-Sequence, Rerank
1
INTRODUCTION
During the last few years, question answering (QA) based intelligent
assistants have been very popular – partly due to the progresses
achieved in deep learning and big data techniques, and partly due
to the growing requirements in the real-world.
Customer service is one of the promising ﬁelds that intelligent
assistants can play a key role in. On one hand, there is a strong
demand for customer service staﬀin the E-commerce (EC) ﬁled
along with the fast-growing EC market. For example, according to
the 2016 (ﬁrst half) Annual Data Monitoring Report, the GMV of
China EC market was 10.5 trillion with an increase of 37.6% year-
on-year. On the other hand, with more and more people paying
atention to shopping experience and service quality nowadays, the
issues of traditional customer service are becoming obvious, e.g.,
limited availability (only oﬃce hours), ineﬃciency (customers ofen
have to wait minutes), and long turn-on time, especially during
peak period (e.g., the “Double 11” day).
Tis raises an important question: is it possible to design an
intelligent assistant that can relieve customer service staﬀfrom
answering simple, common and repetitive questions, and let them
focus on the cases that really need human participation? If so, we
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permited. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission

CIKM’17, November 6–10, 2017, Singapore.
© 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ISBN 978-1-4503-4918-5/17/11...$15.00
DOI: htp://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3132847.3133169
can largely facilitate productivity, improve user experience and
reduce cost.
We have been working on this topic for years. Our intelligent
assistant, AliMe Assist, oﬀers three kinds of services: assistance
service, customer service and chating service. Moreover, it is able
to take voice and text input, incorporate context to QA, and support
multi-round interaction. Currently, it serves millions of customer
questions per day (mainly Chinese, also some English) and is able
to address 85% of them. In this paper, we present the system and
the underlying techniques, and share our experience in dealing
with real-world QA scenarios in the E-commerce industry.
Tis work makes the following contributions:
• Designs and develops a real-world industrial intelligent
assistant that oﬀers customers with assistance service, cus-
tomer service and chating service in E-commerce.
• Presents a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) model that
incorporates the context of customer questions for inten-
tion identiﬁcation.
• Proposes a semantic normalization and knowledge graph
based approach for knowledge-oriented customer service
question answering.
• Proposes a hybrid approach that uses an atentive Sequence-
to-Sequence model to optimize the joint results of informa-
tion retrieval and generation model for chating.
Te rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 presents
an overview of the system; Section 3 discusses the system features
and the underlying techniques; Section 4 gives a demonstration of
the system; Section 5 reviews related work, and Section 6 concludes
the paper and sketches directions for future work.
2
SYSTEM OVERVIEW
We show the architecture of AliMe Assist in Fig. 1. Te ﬁrst layer
is the input layer, which supports voice and text input from multi-
end (e.g., mobile phone, pad, PC); the second layer sketches the
intention layer, which determines the routing of each question (e.g.,
assistance service or customer service?); the third layer illustrates
the components used for processing questions; and, ﬁnally, the forth
layer stands for the knowledge source (QA pairs and knowledge
graph), from which answers are retrieved.
We show the processing ﬂow of customer questions in AliMe
Assist in Fig. 2. Given an input question q, it ﬁrst passes through
the business rule parser, a trie-based patern matcher. If q matches
certain patern(s), it will be judged as follows: if it requests for
task-oriented assistance service, e.g., “I want to book a ﬂight ticket”,
it will be handled by a slot ﬁlling engine; if it asks about promotional
activities, e.g., “what is the entry of grabbing red envelopes?”, a
arXiv:1801.05032v1  [cs.CL]  12 Jan 2018

Knowledge 
Graph Engine
Chat 
Engine
Information 
Retrieval Engine
Slot Filling 
Engine
Multi-Mode
(Voice, Text)
Multi-End
(Mobile Phone, Pad, PC)
Knowledge Source (QA Pair, Knowledge Graph)
Semantic 
Parser
Intention Identification
Intention Classifier
Business Rule Parser
Figure 1: Te overall architecture of AliMe Assist.
pre-conﬁgured answer will be returned; if it is for online service
staﬀ, e.g., “real person, please”, AliMe Assist will ask the user to
provide a description of her/his problem. If q does not match any
patern, it will be sent to an intention classiﬁer for classiﬁcation.
Tat is, to be labelled with intention scenarios such as “return of
sales” and “refund”, depend on which q will be directed to diﬀerent
service staﬀgroup if human participation is needed.
q
hit
Business 
Rules Parser
Intention 
Classifier
Semantic 
Parser
Knowledge 
Graph Engine
Information 
Retrieval Engine
no
has tag
 
yes
no
has answer
yes
no
has answer
yes
no
Chat
Engine
is chat
yes
yes
no
output answer
has context
ask user?
no
yes
Sales 
Promotion
no
Service
Staff
Service Staff
output answer
Wording 
Template
Wording 
Template
yes
integrate q 
with its context
Intention Component
Slot Filling 
Engine
Assistance Service
Chatting Service
Customer Service
output 
answer
router
Figure 2: Te overall processing ﬂow of AliMe Assist
Next, q will be fed into a trie-based semantic parser. If any seman-
tic tag (entity in knowledge graph, e.g., “customer account”) is iden-
tiﬁed, q will be treated as business related (knowledge-oriented),
and the identiﬁed tags will be used to retrieve answer through a
knowledge graph engine. If no answer is retrieved, AliMe Assist
will enrich q with its context (the previous question) and sent the
concatenation back to the semantic parser again.
Tere are two points to be noted. First, the question q may not
have a context (i.e., q is the ﬁrst question of a session). Second,
it could be the case that there is still no answer even with the
concatenation. In both cases, AliMe Assist will move to the next step
(i.e., it uses the context of q only once, if exists): asking customers
for more information if the identiﬁed tags include only one entity
or action, otherwise passing on q to the retrieval engine. In case the
retrieval model still fails to give an answer, q will be transferred
to service staﬀaccording to the labelled intention scenario (our
recommendation engine is omited here due to space limitation).
On the other hand, if q is irrelevant to business and is recognized
as a chat, a chat engine will be employed to provide a response. If q
is not a chat, a pre-conﬁgured answer will be outputed.
3
SYSTEM FEATURES
3.1
Intention Identiﬁcation
User intention in AliMe Assist is classiﬁed into three categories:
(1) requesting for assistance, e.g., “I want to book a ﬂight ticket”;
(2) asking for information or solution, e.g., “how to ﬁnd back my
password?”; (3) chating (e.g., “I am unhappy”). Each category
is further specialized according to supported biz scenarios, e.g.,
assistance service supports ﬂight booking, mobile recharge, etc.
Te two components, business rule parser and intention classiﬁer,
work together in identifying the intention of each customer ques-
tion. Our business rule parser is built on hundreds of thousands of
paterns obtained from frequent itemset mining and a trie-based
patern matcher. Our intention classiﬁer is built on CNN [5], as
shown in Fig. 3.
Input 
n : sentence length
n' : number of semantic tags
h : embedding size 
n
Convolution (ReLU)
k = 2, 3, 4, 5
k × h 
Max-over-time 
pooling
Fully connection
softmax
n'
h = 300
Figure 3: Intention classiﬁcation with CNN
Te input of our convolutional intention model is the embedding
of each word of a given question q, followed by that of the semantic
tags identiﬁed from q and its previous question (i.e., its context).
Te embeddings are pre-trained using FastText [2] and further ﬁne
tuned in the CNN model. Our experiment data includes 40 intention
scenarios and 67,797 instances (47,455 for training and 20,342 for
testing). With semantic tags, our CNN model is able to achieve a
precision of 89.91%, which is 0.91 percent higher than that without
them (89%). Both models are much beter than our baseline one (an
ensemble of SVM and MaxEnt, 82.71%).
We choose one layer convolution-pooling CNN instead of Re-
current NN (e.g., LSTM) because: (1) CNN can also capture the
context information of words in text (before and afer) and is able
to achieve a “good enough” result in our case; (2) it is eﬃcient
and is able to support a QPS (query per second) around 200 in our
industrial seting. More convolution-pooling layers or RNN is able
to achieve beter results, but has a poorer scalability.
3.2
Task-Oriented Assistance Service
Assistance service scenarios ofen require customers to provide
information for certain atributes/slots in order to ﬁnish a speciﬁc
task. For example, to book a ﬂight ticket, one needs to provide the
departure, the destination and the date. Our solution to such task-
oriented QA is to ﬁrst deﬁne a schema that speciﬁes the mandatory
and optional slots for a task, and then use slot-ﬁlling to extract
from customer inputs and ﬁll in values for the predeﬁned slots. Our
slot-ﬁlling engine is mainly built on dictionaries and paterns, and is
able to identify ﬁfeen kinds of atributes, e.g., product, location and
date. AliMe Assist will ask customers for mandatory information,
and request third-party services to complete the task.

3.3
Knowledge-Oriented Customer Service
In AliMe Assist, customer questions looking for information/solutions
need to be addressed as precise as possible. We employ knowledge
graph to tackle such knowledge-oriented questions.
Te building blocks of our knowledge graph are entities and
relations. We ﬁrst extract candidate nouns and verbs from natural
language knowledge items through word segmentation, part-of-
speech (POS) tagging and tf-idf ﬁltering, and use them to construct
high-order (a combination of several, usually two) entities based
on mutual information. We then have business analysts review
the entities, and design relations to build a hierarchical structure.
Finally, we adopt Neo4j 1 as our query engine. Our knowledge graph
includes several thousands of entities and a ﬁxed set of relations, and
supports short (one- or two-) hop reasoning. For example, as shown
in Fig. 4, if one asks about “how to ﬁnd my lost login password”
which does not have an associated knowledge item, we can provide
a generalized but also useful answer by returning the knowledge
item associated with its parent node “ﬁnd lost password”.
 

	
 



	
 



	
	


	
 
	
	
 
	

	





	

	
Figure 4: An excerpt of a knowledge graph
In practice, semantic normalization – mapping diﬀerent kinds
of uterances to a semantically equivalent entity in the knowledge
graph – is of key importance as customer questions are ofen highly
diversiﬁed. We tackle this problem through uterance diversiﬁca-
tion and patern mining. In the ﬁrst stage, given a set of knowl-
edge items K, we identify its diversiﬁed uterances through ﬁnding
similar answers K ′ from historical chat logs (between customers
and service staﬀ) and taking the corresponding questions for K ′.
Te similarity calculation algorithm is designed based on sentence
embedding [6], which helps to capture semantic similarity, and
implemented using Map-Reduce [3]. Once we have the mapping
between a knowledge item and a set of diversiﬁed uterances, we
are able to extract wording paterns for entities using frequent item-
sets mining. Tese paterns will be used in the trie-based semantic
parser to identify semantic tags (again, entities in knowledge graph)
for each customer question.
Compared with traditional information retrieval (IR) model, our
knowledge graph approach increases accuracy by 10%. Since our
knowledge graph covers only frequently asked (i.e., a small subset
of) knowledge items, retrieval model is used as a complement to
improve recall.
1htps://neo4j.com/
3.4
Chatting Service
In AliMe Assist, the majority of customer questions is business-
related, but also around 5% of them is chat-oriented (several hun-
dreds of thousands in number). To oﬀer beter user experience, we
build an open-domain chatbot engine, where we propose a hybrid
approach that uses an atentive Sequence-to-Sequence (Seq2Seq)
model to optimize the joint results of IR models [15] and Seq2Seq
generation models [10, 11].
Te overview of our approach is shown in Fig. 5. First, a retrieval
model is used to collect candidate answers. Second, an atentive
Seq2Seq model is employed to rerank the candidates by giving each
candidate a conﬁdence score. Top candidate with a conﬁdence score
that exceeds a given threshold can be used as an answer. If it is
lower than the threshold, the generated answer by Seq2Seq model
will be taken as the output. Interested readers can refer to [7] for
details.
Question 
q 
IR 
Candidates 
r1, r2, …, rk 
o(r) = max o(ri) 
Output 
(Answer) 
Answer 
Generation 
r’ 
o(r) ≥ T 
Yes : r 
 
No : r’ 
Answer 
Rerank 
q - ri: o(ri) 
Attentive  
Seq2Seq  
Model 
QA  
Knowledge  
Base 
r’ 
r 
Figure 5: An overview of our hybrid chat approach
Extensive experiments show that our approach signiﬁcantly out-
performs IR and generation models: in a test with 600 questions, the
Ptop1 (whether the top-1 candidate is acceptable) of our approach,
IR and Seq2Seq generation are 60.01%, 47.11% and 52.02%; an online
A/B test (2136 questions, 1047 by the hybrid approach, 1089 by IR)
also conﬁrms that our hybrid approach performs much beter than
IR (Ptop1: 60.36% vs. 40.86%).
4
DEMONSTRATION
We launch AliMe Assist for a real-world industrial intelligent assis-
tant 2, which currently serves millions of customer questions per
day and is able to address 85% of them.
We demonstrate the key features, namely assistance service, cus-
tomer service and chating service, through three realistic scenarios
in Fig 6. Fig 6 (a) illustrates how AliMe Assist helps users to book
a ﬂight ticket through asking for needed information step by step,
and then calling Ali Trip, a travel agency of Alibaba Group, to
complete the task. Fig 6 (b) demonstrates how AliMe Assist helps
to address customer service questions by combining the previous
question “I want to check” and the current one “Taobao account”,
and then employing the knowledge graph engine to provide an
answer. Fig 6 (c) shows a chat conversation between AliMe Assist
and customers. Tese three scenarios together demonstrate the
intention identiﬁcation feature: given a question, AliMe Assist is
able to identify its intention, and distribute it to the corresponding
service (e.g., assistance service) and scenario (e.g., booking a ﬂight).
2Interested readers can access AliMe Assist through the Taobao App by follow-
ing “My Taobao →My AliMe”, or the web version via htps: //consumerserv-
ice.taobao.com/online-help (text only, assistance service not enabled).

,IA))BBB>/<))B(< <A
<<)-I<??-B*?HDB#
A.B*
-)D)B#BDDBI
 !
((<()A.DH<
<
-	
 !)*()B#D.DH<
??B
?<
-)<(<(
?<
)A,BBD-B*	
,IA))B>
)B-B*IA))B>	
-BB*A)
B*AM
M
 !)))<A.DH<
B-1(I)D<(BB
<)<((*AA-A*)<*?
(*),#AB)CC-
-D
)AI)?>
(D2-(
,IAAB)B(< <A
B?)B?>
B?)B?>
B?)B?>
Figure 6: A demonstration of AliMe Assist
5
RELATED WORK
In this section, we review related work on task-, knowledge-, and
chat-oriented QA, which are closely related to the techniques em-
ployed in AliMe Assist.
Task-oriented QA. Tis belongs to closed domain QA. Typically
people use rule- or template- based methods [12], and dialog state
tracking [4]. Our slot-ﬁlling method is similar to the template-based
method.
Knowledge-oriented QA. Tis technique can be used in both
closed and open domain. Usually, data-driven IR model is used here.
Te idea is to ﬁnd the nearest question(s) from a QA knowledge
base for each input question, e.g., [15]. A recent work [14] has tried
a neural network based method for matching. Being diﬀerent from
these methods, we uses both knowledge graph and IR: the former
is designed for high precision QA in E-commerce and the later is
used as a complement.
Chat-oriented QA. Commonly used methods for this open do-
main QA include IR [15] and generation models [1, 10]. Our ap-
proach alleviates the ﬂaws of both IR and Seq2Seq generation mod-
els: the former can only handle questions that are close to those
in a QA knowledge base, while the later may generate inconsis-
tent or meaningless answers [8]. Another recent combinational
approach [9] uses an IR model to rerank the union of retrieved
and generated answers. Our work diﬀers from it in that we use an
atentive Seq2Seq rerank approach to optimize the joints results of
IR and generation models.
6
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we present AliMe Assist, an intelligent assistant that
is designed for creating an innovative E-commerce experience. We
launch AliMe Assist for a real-world application that oﬀers cus-
tomers with assistance service, customer service and chating ser-
vice, and currently handles millions of customer questions per day.
As for future work, several points will be further explored to
improve our assistant. For example, strengthening context based
multi-round interaction [13], oﬀering shopping guidance based on
Reinforcement Learning (RL), empowering AliMe Assist with the
capability to “read” images through image recognition, etc.
