Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 37 (2010) 479-525
Submitted 12/09; published 03/10
Multiattribute Auctions Based on Generalized Additive
Independence
Yagil Engel

Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Faculty of Industrial Engineering & Management
Technion City, Haifa 32000, Israel
Michael P. Wellman

University of Michigan
Division of Computer Science & Engineering
2260 Hayward St, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2121, USA
Abstract
We develop multiattribute auctions that accommodate generalized additive independent
(GAI) preferences. We propose an iterative auction mechanism that maintains prices on
potentially overlapping GAI clusters of attributes, thus decreases elicitation and computa-
tional burden, and creates an open competition among suppliers over a multidimensional
domain. Most signiﬁcantly, the auction is guaranteed to achieve surplus which approxi-
mates optimal welfare up to a small additive factor, under reasonable equilibrium strategies
of traders. The main departure of GAI auctions from previous literature is to accommo-
date non-additive trader preferences, hence allowing traders to condition their evaluation
of speciﬁc attributes on the value of other attributes. At the same time, the GAI structure
supports a compact representation of prices, enabling a tractable auction process. We per-
form a simulation study, demonstrating and quantifying the signiﬁcant eﬃciency advantage
of more expressive preference modeling. We draw random GAI-structured utility functions
with various internal structures, generate additive functions that approximate the GAI
utility, and compare the performance of the auctions using the two representations. We
ﬁnd that allowing traders to express existing dependencies among attributes improves the
economic eﬃciency of multiattribute auctions.
1. Introduction
Multiattribute trading mechanisms extend traditional, price-only mechanisms by facilitat-
ing negotiation over a set of predeﬁned attributes representing various non-price aspects
of a deal. Rather than negotiate over a fully speciﬁed good or service, a multiattribute
mechanism delays commitment to particular conﬁgurations until it extracts suﬃcient infor-
mation on traders’ preferences. For example, a company’s procurement department may
run a multiattribute auction to select a supplier of hard drives. Supplier oﬀers may be
evaluated not only over the price they oﬀer, but also over features such as volume, RPM,
access time, latency, transfer rate, and so on. In addition, suppliers may oﬀer contracts
diﬀering in terms such as warranty, delivery time, and service.
In order to account for traders’ preferences, the auction mechanism must extract evalu-
ative information over a complex domain of multidimensional conﬁgurations. Constructing
and communicating a complete preference speciﬁcation can pose a severe burden for even a
c⃝2010 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

Engel & Wellman
moderate number of attributes, hence practical multiattribute auctions must either accom-
modate partial speciﬁcations, or support compact expression of preferences assuming some
simpliﬁed form. By far the most popular multiattribute form to adopt is the simplest: an
additive representation where overall value is a linear combination of values associated with
each attribute. For example, several recent proposals for iterative multiattribute auctions
(Beil & Wein, 2003; Bichler, 2001; David, Azoulay-Schwartz, & Kraus, 2002; Parkes &
Kalagnanam, 2005) require additive preference representations.
Such additivity reduces the complexity of preference speciﬁcation exponentially (com-
pared to the general discrete case), but precludes expression of any interdependencies among
the attributes. In practice, however, interdependencies among natural attributes are quite
common. For example, the hard-drive buyer may exhibit complementary preferences for
volume and access time (since the performance eﬀect is more salient if much data is in-
volved), or may view a strong warranty as a good substitute for high reliability ratings.
Similarly, a seller’s production characteristics can easily violate additivity, for example if
decreasing access time is technically more diﬃcult for higher-capacity drives. In such cases
an additive value function may not be able to provide an adequate approximation of real
preferences.
On the other hand, fully general models are intractable, and multiattribute preferences
typically exhibit some structure. Our goal, therefore, is to identify the subtler yet more
widely applicable structured representations, and exploit these properties of preferences in
trading mechanisms.
We propose an iterative auction mechanism based on just such a ﬂexible preference
structure. Our approach is inspired by the design of an iterative multiattribute procurement
auction for additive preferences, due to Parkes and Kalagnanam (2005) (PK). PK present
two auction designs: the ﬁrst (NLD) makes no assumptions about traders’ preferences, and
lets sellers bid on the full multidimensional attribute space. Because NLD maintains an
exponential price structure, it is suitable only for small domains. The other auction (AD)
assumes additive buyer valuation and seller cost functions. It collects sell bids per attribute
level and for a single discount term. The price of a conﬁguration is the sum of the prices of
the chosen attribute levels minus the discount.
The auction we propose also supports compact price spaces, albeit for levels of clus-
ters of attributes rather than singletons. We employ a preference decomposition based on
generalized additive independence (GAI), a model ﬂexible enough to accommodate inter-
dependencies to the exact degree of accuracy desired, yet providing a compact functional
form to the extent that interdependence can be limited.
First, we build a direct, formally justiﬁed link from preference statements over priced
outcomes to a generalized additive decomposition of the willingness-to-pay (wtp) function.
After laying out this infrastructure, we employ this representation tool for the development
of a multiattribute iterative auction mechanism that allows traders to express their complex
preferences in GAI format. We then study the auction’s allocational, computational, and
practical properties. Next, we present a simulation study of our proposed auction mecha-
nism, in order to practically evaluate the economic and computational properties of GAI
auctions. We simulate the auctions using random GAI utility functions, including some
based on constrained preference structures often exhibited in applications. The simulations
let us quantify the beneﬁts of modeling preferences accurately using GAI, in comparison to
480

GAI Auctions
using an additive approximation. We show that under most circumstances, a GAI auction
achieves signiﬁcantly higher surplus than an auction that uses an additive approximation
of preferences.
After providing background on multiattribute preferences and multiattribute auctions
(Section 2), we develop new multiattribute structures for wtp functions, supporting general-
ized additive decompositions (Section 3). We describe our auction mechanism in Section 4,
followed by a detailed example in Section 5, and study the mechanism’s allocational, com-
putational, and practical properties in Section 6. We present our simulation framework in
Section 7, and discuss the experimental results in Section 8.
2. Background
In this section we provide essential background on multiattribute preferences (Sections 2.1
and 2.2) and on multiattribute auctions (Section 2.3).
2.1 Multiattribute Preferences and Utility
Let Θ denote the space of possible outcomes, with ⪯a preference relation (weak total order)
over Θ. Let A = {a0, . . . , an} be a set of attributes describing Θ. Each attribute a ∈A has
a domain D(a), so that Θ ⊆!n
i=1 D(ai). Capital letters denote subsets of attributes, small
latin letters (with or without numeric subscripts) denote speciﬁc attributes, and X = A\X.
θ (and variations such as θ′ or ˆθ) indicate speciﬁc outcome in Θ. An instantiation to a subset
of attributes Y is denoted using prime signs (as in Y ′) or numerical superscript (as in Y 1).
In particular, Y ′ is a projection on Y of some instantiations θ ∈Θ.
To represent an
instantiation of subsets X, Y at the same time we use a sequence of instantiation symbols,
as in X1Y 2.
The preference relation ⪯over outcomes is usually represented numerically by a value
function v(·) (Keeney & Raiﬀa, 1976).
Deﬁnition 1 (Value Function). v : Θ →ℜis a value function representing ⪯if for any
θ, θ′ ∈Θ, v(θ) ≤v(θ′) iﬀθ ⪯θ′.
Clearly, any monotonic transformation of v(·) is also a value function for ⪯.
In many cases it is useful to represent, beyond a simple preference order over outcomes,
a notion of strength of preferences. A value function that expresses strength of preferences is
called a cardinal value function. A measurable value function is a well-established cardinal
value framework which posits the existence of a preference order ˆ⪯over pairs of outcomes.
For some θ ⪯θ′ and ˆθ ⪯ˆθ′, the statement (θ, θ′) ˆ⪯(ˆθ, ˆθ′) means that the strength of
preference of ˆθ′ over ˆθ is greater than or equal to that of θ′ over θ. Krantz, Luce, Suppes,
and Tversky (1971) establish the set of axioms ensuring the existence of a utility function
representing ˆ⪯.
Deﬁnition 2 (Measurable Value Function). A measurable value function (MVF) is a
value function u : Θ →ℜ, such that for any θ, θ′, ˆθ, ˆθ′ ∈Θ, for which θ ⪯θ′ and ˆθ ⪯ˆθ′, the
following holds:
u(θ′) −u(θ) ≤u(ˆθ′) −u(ˆθ) ⇔(θ, θ′) ˆ⪯(ˆθ, ˆθ′).
(1)
481

Engel & Wellman
Hence the order over diﬀerences in values of u(·) correspond exactly to the order over
preference diﬀerences. Note that an MVF can also be used as a value function representing
⪯, because (θ′, θ) ˆ⪯(θ′′, θ) iﬀθ′ ⪯θ′′, for any θ.
In auction theory and mechanism design, traders’ preferences are usually represented
using a quasi-linear value function, such as v(θ, p) = u(θ)+p, where p represents a monetary
outcome.1 The cardinal value function u(θ) expresses strength of preference, in that the
diﬀerence u(θ′) −u(θ′′) corresponds to the additional amount a trader is willing to pay
for θ′ relative to θ′′. For example, if θ′ represents a red Mercedes with a sunroof, and θ′′
denotes a blue Subaru with no sunroof, then u(θ′) −u(θ′′) is the strength of preference for
the Mercedes conﬁguration over the Subaru. If the Mercedes costs p′ and the Subaru p′′,
then according to v(θ, p) the trader prefers the Mercedes deal iﬀu(θ′) −u(θ′′) ≥p′ −p′′.
In fact, u(·) can be easily shown to be an MVF, where the preference diﬀerences cor-
respond to diﬀerences in willingness-to-pay (Engel & Wellman, 2007). For this reason, we
use MVF as the basis for utility in this work, and assume that traders’ willingness-to-pay
(wtp) functions constitute an MVF.
Reasoning over full outcomes is hard in several ways. Most notably, it is diﬃcult for
humans to compare outcomes over many dimensions, and complex for machines to store
and analyze preferences over a number of outcomes that is exponential in the number of
attributes.
It is therefore useful to consider preferences over the joint product of some
Y ⊂A, considering the rest of the attributes Y ﬁxed on some predeﬁned values. Such an
order is also often referred to as a ceteris paribus preference order—one partial outcome is
preferred to another all else being equal.
Deﬁnition 3 (Conditional Preference). Partial outcome Y 2 is conditionally preferred
to partial outcome Y 1 given Y
′, if Y 1Y
′ ⪯Y 2Y
′. The conditional preference order over Y
given Y
′ is denoted by ⪯Y
′, hence Y 1Y
′ ⪯Y 2Y
′ is abbreviated Y 1 ⪯Y
′ Y 2.
In general, conditional preferences may depend on the particular assignment chosen for
the rest of the attributes. More precisely, if Y 1 ≺Y
′ Y 2, we could still ﬁnd that Y 2 ≺Y
′′ Y 1
for some Y
′′ ̸= Y
′. When this is the case, one needs to maintain both conditional preference
orders ⪯Y
′ and ⪯Y
′′, and hence in general this scheme might not yield any computational
beneﬁts. Fortunately, in many cases one can identify subsets Y for which this preference
reversal does not occur, that is the preference order over Y is invariant to the instantiation
of Y .
Deﬁnition 4 (Preferential Independence). Y is preferential independent (PI) of Y ,
written PI(Y, Y ), if for any Y 1 and Y 2, and for any Y
′, Y
′′, we have Y 1 ⪯Y
′ Y 2 iﬀY 1 ⪯Y
′′
Y 2.
First-order preferential independence (FOPI), independence of a single attribute from
the rest, is a natural assumption in many domains. For example, in typical purchase de-
cisions greater quantity or higher quality is more desirable regardless of the assignments
to other attributes. Preferential independence of higher order, however, requires invariance
of the tradeoﬀs among some attributes with respect to variation in others, a more strin-
gent independence condition. The MPI condition, deﬁned below, is over the global set of
attributes A, and requires all possible subsets to be PI.
1. We use the term trader when referring to either buyers or sellers.
482

GAI Auctions
Deﬁnition 5 (Mutual Preferential Independence). Attributes A are mutually prefer-
ential independent (MPI) iﬀfor all Y ⊂A, PI(Y, Y ).
Preferential independence can greatly simplify the form of v.
Theorem 1 (Debreu, 1959). A preference order over set of attributes A can be represented
by an additive value function
v(a1, . . . , an) =
n
"
i=1
vi(ai),
iﬀA is mutually preferential independent.
Dyer and Sarin (1979) extend additivity theory to MVF, and specify the conditions
under which u(·) as well has an additive structure as above. Eﬀectively, additive forms
used in trading mechanisms assume MPI over the full set of attributes, including the money
attribute. Intuitively that means willingness-to-pay for levels of an attribute or attributes
cannot be aﬀected by the instantiation of other attributes. This sweeping condition rarely
holds in practice (Von Winterfeldt & Edwards, 1986). Therefore, recent AI literature often
relaxes the MPI assumption by imposing additivity only with respect to subsets of attributes
which may overlap.
Deﬁnition 6 (Generalized Additive Independence). Let I1, . . . , Ig be (not necessarily
disjoint) subsets of A, such that #g
i=1 Ii = A. The elements I1, . . . , Ig are called generalized
additive independent (GAI) if there exist functions f1, . . . , fg such that,
u(a1, . . . , an) =
g
"
r=1
fr(Ir).
(2)
2.2 Related Work on Generalized Independence
Our deﬁnition of GAI is somewhat nonstandard. Most literature deﬁnes a GAI condition
for the expected utility function (von Neumann & Morgenstern, 1944). In that well-known
model, a particular choice results in a lottery, that is a probability distribution over out-
comes. The expected utility function represents a complete preference order over lotteries.
Informally, the GAI deﬁnition requires preferences on lotteries over Θ to depend only on
the margins over the subsets I1, . . . , Ig. The form of Eq. (2) is a result of that deﬁnition,
obtained by Fishburn (1967). Fishburn not only introduces the functional decomposition,
but also provides a well-deﬁned form for the functional constituents f1, . . . , fg. Graphical
models and elicitation procedures for GAI decomposable utility were developed within the
expected utility framework (Bacchus & Grove, 1995; Boutilier, Bacchus, & Brafman, 2001;
Gonzales & Perny, 2004; Braziunas & Boutilier, 2005). In addition, generalized additive
utility models have been employed by Hyaﬁl and Boutilier (2006) as an aid in direct rev-
elation mechanisms, and by Robu, Somefun, and La Poutr´e (2005) for opponent modeling
in bilateral multi-item negotiation.
Bacchus and Grove (1995), who in fact coined the term GAI, show that the decom-
position can also be obtained as a result of a collection of local, easier to detect, binary
483

Engel & Wellman
independence conditions. More speciﬁcally, they rely on a form called conditional additive
independence, which, informally, corresponds to a GAI decomposition limited to two (over-
lapping) subsets X ⊂A and Y ⊂A. They prove that this condition can be expressed as
a separation criterion on a graph whose nodes correspond to A, by the means of a perfect
map (Pearl, 1988). Crucially, the utility function decomposes to GAI form over lower di-
mensional functions, each deﬁned on a maximal clique of the graph. When combined with
Fishburn’s work, their result provides a well-deﬁned functional form that can be obtained
from a collection of conditional additive independence conditions. This result relies on the
form of lotteries as a basis for the utility function and the independence conditions.
The expression of willingness-to-pay requires a cardinal measure of preferences, yet
without uncertainty, there is no need for an expected utility representation. We therefore
invoke the MVF framework, and in Section 3, build on the additive decompositions for MVF
developed by Dyer and Sarin (1979) to develop multiattribute preference structures for wtp.
This development enables us to follow the footsteps of Fishburn (1967) and Bacchus and
Grove (1995) and show that a well-deﬁned GAI form for MVF can also be obtained using
a collection of easy-to-detect binary independence conditions.
2.3 Multiattribute Auctions
The distinguishing feature of a multiattribute auction is that the goods are deﬁned by
vectors of attributes. As above, we use A to denote a set of attributes describing the domain
Θ. A conﬁguration is a particular attribute vector, θ ∈Θ. Multiattribute auctions are used
primarily for procurement, as part of strategic sourcing processes (Sandholm, 2007). In
the procurement model there is a single buyer, who has a utility function (representing
willingness-to-pay) ub(θ) for purchasing θ ∈Θ. There are m sellers s1, . . . , sm with utility
functions ci : Θ →ℜ, representing the cost for si to supply conﬁgurations in Θ to the buyer.
Deﬁnition 7 (Multiattribute Allocation Problem). The multiattribute allocation prob-
lem (Parkes & Kalagnanam, 2005) is:
MAP =
max
i∈{1,...,m},θ∈Θ ub(θ) −ci(θ).
(3)
An allocation (s∗
i , θ∗) solving MAP is said to maximize the surplus of the procurement
problem.
MAP can be decomposed to two subproblems: ﬁrst ﬁnd the most eﬃcient conﬁguration
for each trader, and then ﬁnd the trader whose eﬃcient conﬁguration yields the highest
surplus. We call the ﬁrst part the multiattribute matching problem (Engel, Wellman, &
Lochner, 2006).
Deﬁnition 8 (Multiattribute Matching Problem). The multiattribute matching prob-
lem (MMP) for a buyer b and a seller si is:
MMP(b, si) = arg max
θ∈Θ ub(θ) −ci(θ).
We also call a conﬁguration θ∗selected by MMP(b, si) a bilaterally eﬃcient conﬁguration
for si.
484

GAI Auctions
Most of the theoretical work on surplus-maximizing multiattribute auctions relates in
some way to the foundational work by Che (1993). In Che’s model, the good or service
is characterized by a single quality attribute, and each seller has an independent private
cost function over quality.
The buyer announces a scoring rule to the sellers, by which
price-quality oﬀers will be evaluated.
Che suggests several types of auctions, including
the second-score auction, where the seller bidding highest score wins, and must provide a
combination of price and quality that achieves the second-best score. In the second-score
mechanism, bidding truthfully is an equilibrium in dominant strategies. In particular, Che
shows that sellers bid on the quality that maximizes the diﬀerence between the buyer’s
scoring rule and their own cost function; in other words, on the respective MMP solution.
Branco (1997) generalizes Che’s model and some of his results to correlated costs.
This basic model was later generalized by several authors to account explicitly for mul-
tiple quality attributes, and usually restricting the scoring rule to be additive over the
attributes (Bichler, 2001; David et al., 2002). Vulkan and Jennings (2000) suggest a mod-
iﬁed version of English auctions (iterative auctions that require new bids to increment
over current bid price) under which bidders are required to improve current score, rather
than price. Sandholm and Suri (2006) consider the incorporation of non-price attributes in
multi-item (combinatorial) auctions.
The literature surveyed above emphasizes that auctions require the buyer to reveal a
scoring function prior to bidding.
In order to achieve economic eﬃciency, this scoring
function must convey the buyer’s full utility function ub(·). This is a major obstacle to
practical adaption of these mechanisms. Procurement auctions are rarely an isolated event,
and the buyer-supplier relationships usually evolve and change over time, during which
suppliers may retain some market power, and take advantage of the information revealed
by the buyer. Events are sometimes conducted on a recurrent basis, and several events may
be conducted for related goods with correlated valuations. In addition, the buyer may wish
to keep secret the way her utility may be discriminating for or against particular suppliers
(Koppius, 2002).
As noted in Section 1, Parkes and Kalagnanam (2005) suggest an alternative approach,
which employs prices over the space of conﬁgurations to drive traders to the eﬃcient con-
ﬁgurations. Auction NLD maintains a price for each θ ∈Θ, and sellers bid for such full
conﬁguration in each round. Auction AD maintains a price for each level a′
i ∈D(ai). Prices
are initially set to be high. In each round, sellers bid on a particular value for each attribute,
and the auction selects a set of levels (again, per attribute) which are myopically buyer pre-
ferred in that round, that is, approximately maximize the buyer’s utility with respect to
current prices. In addition, the auction maintains a discount factor that is applied to ensure
that a single seller is eventually selected. The price of a conﬁguration is deﬁned as the sum
of the prices of the chosen attribute levels minus the discount. After each round, prices of
particular levels of particular attributes are decremented by a constant ϵ, according to a set
of price change rules, ensuring that the auction ultimately converges to an eﬃcient solution.
Both auctions are shown to obtain optimal surplus (up to ϵ-proportional error), when
all sellers bid myopically rather than strategically (we deﬁne this concept formally in Sec-
tion 6.1). The myopic behavior is shown to be an ex-post Nash equilibrium. Auction NLD
is fully expressive but not tractable when the number of attributes is large. Auction AD
is computationally eﬃcient, but its expressiveness is limited to additive preferences (see
485

Engel & Wellman
discussion following Theorem 1). When traders’ preferences are not additive, the welfare
achieved by the auction is not necessarily optimal; that is, it does solve MAP optimally,
but with respect to inaccurate utility functions. Moreover, it is not clear how this lack of
expressiveness may aﬀect the incentives of traders to act strategically.
Theoretically, one could also use the well-known Vickrey-Clake-Grove (VCG) mecha-
nism. Parkes and Kalagnanam deﬁne the sell-side VCG mechanism: all traders submit
their full utility or cost functions, MAP is solved by the auction engine, and the winning
seller pays according to her VCG price (deﬁnition of this pricing is provided in Section 6.1).
In such an auction, traders can be allowed to use any compact preference structure, includ-
ing GAI. However, this scheme suﬀers from the same disadvantages as any of the proposals
that require full revelation of utility.
To summarize, no previously suggested surplus-maximizing multiattribute procurement
auction is at the same time expressive (accommodates interdependencies between attributes),
tractable (its computations do not depend on the fully exponential domain), and preserving
of the buyer’s private information, meaning (minimally) that it does not require the buyer
to reveal a full utility function before extracting any bids from sellers. Our proposed mech-
anism, as we show theoretically and using simulations, possesses attractive properties on
all these criteria.
3. Detection of GAI Structure for Measurable Value Functions
In this section we provide the basis for the application of GAI decomposition in procurement
problems. In Section 3.1 we show how GAI can be obtained as a collection of local, weaker
conditions which are based on invariance of willingness-to-pay. In Section 3.2 we use an
example to demonstrate how this process can be used in procurement problems.
3.1 Diﬀerence Independence and GAI
Dyer and Sarin (1979) introduce for measurable value an analog to additive independence,
called diﬀerence independence. Our ﬁrst step is to introduce a conditional generalization of
their deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 9 (Conditional Diﬀerence Independence). Let X, Y ⊂A and X ∩Y = ∅,
and deﬁne Z = A \ X ∪Y . X is conditionally diﬀerence independent of Y , denoted as
CDI(X, Y ), if for any Z′ ∈D(Z), and for any X1, X2 ∈D(X), Y 1, Y 2 ∈D(Y ),
(X1Y 1Z′, X2Y 1Z′) ˆ∼(X1Y 2Z′, X2Y 2Z′),
(4)
where the symbol ˆ∼indicates that ˆ⪯and ˆ⪰both hold.
By the deﬁnition of MVFs (1), the CDI condition (4) can be expressed equivalently in
terms of measurable value:
u(X1Y 1Z′) −u(X2Y 1Z′) = u(X1Y 2Z′) −u(X2Y 2Z′)
This condition states that the value, or willingness-to-pay, for a change in the assignment
to X does not depend on the current assignment of Y , for any ﬁxed value of Z.
A CDI condition leads to a convenient decomposition of the MVF.
486

GAI Auctions
Lemma 2. Let u(A) be an MVF representing preference diﬀerences, with X, Y, Z as spec-
iﬁed in Deﬁnition 9. Then CDI(X, Y ) iﬀ
u(A) = u(X0, Y, Z) + u(X, Y 0, Z) −u(X0, Y 0, Z),
for any arbitrary instantiations X0, Y 0.
With a single CDI condition, we can therefore replace the n-ary function u(X, Y, Z) with
two lower-dimensional functions u(X0, Y, Z) and u(X, Y 0, Z). It is reasonable to assume
that one can apply more CDI conditions to further decompose the resulting functions. In
order to take full advantage of all existing CDI conditions, we introduce the notion of a
dependency graph, which is a simpliﬁcation of the concept of perfect map mentioned in
Section 2.2.
Deﬁnition 10 (Dependency Graph). Let S denote a set, and R a binary relation over
2S. Then a graph G = (S, E) is a dependency graph for R if for any S1, S2 ⊂S, it holds
that (S1, S2) ∈R iﬀfor any a1 ∈S1 and a2 ∈S2, (a1, a2) /∈E.
Hence the dependency graph expresses R as a separation criterion; two subsets have a
direct connection iﬀthey are not in R. A dependency graph for CDI can be constructed
simply by removing any edge (a1, a2) for which CDI({a1}, {a2}); this is because CDI(S1, S2)
holds iﬀCDI({a1}, {a2}) holds for any a1 ∈S1 and a2 ∈S2. We use the term CDI map for
a dependency graph induced by a CDI relation.
The next theorem links the CDI condition, the CDI map, and a GAI decomposition
over A. In fact, it establishes that the functional constituents of GAI decomposition for
MVF are the same as the functional constituents of GAI decomposition for the expected
utility model, as deﬁned by Fishburn (1967). We adopt the following conventional notation.
Let (a0
1, . . . , a0
n) be a predeﬁned vector called the reference outcome. For any I ⊆A, the
function u([I]) stands for the projection of u(A) to I where the rest of the attributes are
ﬁxed at their reference levels.
Theorem 3 (CDI-GAI Theorem). Let G = (A, E) be a CDI map for A, and {I1, . . . , Ig}
a set of (overlapping) maximal cliques of G. Then
u(A) =
g
"
r=1
fr(Ir),
(5)
where
f1
=
u([I1]), and
(6)
for r = 2, . . . , g,
fr
=
u([Ir]) +
r−1
"
j=1
(−1)j
"
1≤i1<···<ij<r
u([
j$
s=1
Iis ∩Ir]).
As a small example, Table 1 exhibits a utility function u(x1, x2, x3). Each of the three
attributes has a boolean domain, that is D(xi) = {0, 1}. Let x0
i and x1
i denote the assign-
ments 0 and 1 (respectively) to xi. We ﬁrst observe that CDI({x1}, {x3}) holds because:2
2. Note that x0
2 and x1
2 correspond to Z′ in Deﬁnition 9.
487

Engel & Wellman
x1
x2
x3
u(x1, x2, x3)
u(x1, x2, x0
3)
u(x0
1, x2, x3)
u(x0
1, x2, x0
3)
u1(I1)
u2(I2)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
5
5
0
0
5
0
0
1
0
2
2
2
2
2
0
1
1
0
6
6
2
2
6
0
0
0
1
3
0
3
0
0
3
1
0
1
8
5
3
0
5
3
0
1
1
7
2
7
2
2
5
1
1
1
11
6
7
2
6
5
Table 1: A utility function over three attributes, decomposable via GAI into the sum of two
functions of two attributes each. u1(·) depends only on {x1, x2} and u2(·) depends only on
{x2, x3}.
1. The utility diﬀerence on values of x1 given x0
2 is 5, for both x0
3 and x1
3. More explicitly,
u(x1
1, x0
2, x0
3) −u(x0
1, x0
2, x0
3) = 5 −0 = 5, and u(x1
1, x0
2, x1
3) −u(x0
1, x0
2, x1
3) = 8 −3 = 5.
2. Similarly, the diﬀerence on x1 given x1
2 is 4, for both x0
3 and x1
3.
Though x1 and x3 are CDI of each other, we see that both depend on x2. For example, the
diﬀerences mentioned above for x1 are 5 and 4 given x0
2 and x1
2 (respectively), hence the
diﬀerence on x1 given ﬁxed x3 depends on the value of x2. The CDI map for this example
therefore includes an edge (x1, x2) and an edge (x2, x3). The maximal cliques of this graph
are I1 = {x1, x2} and I2 = {x2, x3}.
To obtain the numeric decomposition, we ﬁrst deﬁne (x0
1, x0
2, x0
3) as reference values.
Next, from (6), we get u1(I1) = u([I1]) = u(x1, x2, x0
3) and u2(I2) = u([I2]) −u([I1 ∩I2]) =
u(x0
1, x2, x3) −u(x0
1, x2, x0
3). The functions involved are given in Table 1. Note that the
ﬁfth and sixth columns are obtained from the appropriate values of the fourth column; for
example, u(x0
1, x2, x3) for the line x1 = 1, x2 = 1, x3 = 0 is the value u(x1, x2, x3) in the line
x1 = 0, x2 = 1, x3 = 0. It is easy to verify that indeed u(x, y, z) = u1(I1) + u2(I2).
The CDI-GAI Theorem provides an operational form of GAI, by establishing a GAI
decomposition that can be obtained from a collection of simple CDI conditions. The as-
sumption or detection of CDI conditions can be performed incrementally, until the MVF is
decomposed to a reasonable dimension. The CDI conditions, in turn, based as they are on
invariance of preference diﬀerences, are relatively intuitive to detect. This is particularly
true when the diﬀerences carry a direct interpretation, as in the case of willingness-to-pay:
we can check invariance of the monetary amount a buyer is willing to pay to get one outcome
over the other.
The GAI decomposition can be depicted graphically using a clique graph of the CDI
map, that is, a graph whose nodes correspond to maximal cliques of the CDI map. For our
purposes it is convenient to use a particular clique graph called a tree decomposition (or
junction tree). We introduce this well-known concept, and discuss its implications for GAI
representation.
Deﬁnition 11 (Tree Decomposition). A tree decomposition for a graph G = (N, E) is
a pair (T, I), where T = (Ψ, E) is an acyclic graph, I = {Ii | i ∈Ψ} is a collection of
488

GAI Auctions
term
Meaning
Reference
MAP
Multiattribute Allocation Problem
(Parkes & Kalagnanam, 2005)
MMP
Multiattribute Matching Problem
(Engel et al., 2006)
MVF
Measurable Value Function
(Dyer & Sarin, 1979)
PI
Preferential Independence
(Keeney & Raiﬀa, 1976)
FOPI
First-Order Preferential Independence
MPI
Mutual Preferential Independence
(Keeney & Raiﬀa, 1976)
GAI
Generalized Additive Independence
(Bacchus & Grove, 1995)
CDI
Conditional Diﬀerence Independence
CDI map
graph whose separation criterion is CDI
cf. (Bacchus & Grove, 1995)
GAI tree
tree decomposition of a CDI map
cf. (Gonzales & Perny, 2004)
Table 2: Acronym terms, with references to related literature. Empty references indicate
terms introduced in this work. The terms are arranged according to topics: (i) multiat-
tribute economic problems, (ii) independence relations, (iii) graphical concepts.
subsets of N, each corresponding to a node in T, and (i) #
i∈I Ii = N, (ii) for each edge
(n1, n2) ∈E, there exists Ii such that n1, n2 ∈Ii, and (iii) (running intersection) for any
i, j, k ∈Ψ, if j is on the path from i to k in T then Ii ∩Ik ⊆Ij.
Any graph can be tree-decomposed, typically in more than one way. For example, there
can be a single node in I. The width of a tree decomposition is maxi∈I|Ii| −1, and the
treewidth of a graph is the minimum width among all its possible tree decompositions.
It is easy to show that any maximal clique of G is contained within some i ∈I. There-
fore, by Theorem 3, a utility function decomposes additively over the subsets I = {Ii | i ∈
Ψ}, where T = (Ψ, E) is a tree decomposition of the CDI map. The notion of GAI tree is
adapted from the work of Gonzales and Perny (2004), who introduce GAI graphical models
for the expected utility framework.
Deﬁnition 12 (GAI Tree). A GAI tree for u(·) is a tree decomposition of the CDI map
of u(·).
We therefore refer to the elements I1, . . . , Ig of a GAI decomposition as the set I of a
tree decomposition. The next subsection provides a qualitative example of the CDI concept,
its dependency graph, and corresponding GAI tree.
The results of this section lay out the foundations for using GAI decomposition in
multiattribute trading mechanisms. The results generalize additive MVF theory, and justify
the application of methods developed under the expected utility framework (Bacchus &
Grove, 1995; Boutilier et al., 2001; Gonzales & Perny, 2004; Braziunas & Boutilier, 2005)
to representation of monetary value under certainty.
Table 2 summarizes the acronym
terminology introduced up to this point.
3.2 Employing GAI in Procurement
In this section we demonstrate the process of obtaining a GAI decomposition from the
collection of CDI conditions. In addition, this example is used to motivate our approach
489

Engel & Wellman
in comparison to the work of Parkes and Kalagnanam (2005).
Consider a procurement
department that wishes to purchase new hard drives (HD) for the desktops of a large
number of employees. The buyer cares about several characteristics (attributes) of the hard
drives and the particular terms of the procurement contract. Each attribute is listed with a
designated attribute name (the ﬁrst letter), and its domain. In some cases (e.g., attribute
I) we use arbitrary symbols to represent domain elements, abstracting from the meaningful
interpretation they are assumed to have in context.
RPM (R) 3600, 4200, 5400 RPM
Transfer rate (T) 3.4, 4.3, 5.7 MBS
Volume (V) 60, 80, 120, 160 GB
Supplier ranking (S) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
Quality rating (Q) (of the HD brand) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
Delivery time (D) 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35 days
Warranty (W) 1, 2, 3 years
Insurance (I) (for the case the deal is signed but not implemented) α1, α2, α3
Payment timeline (P) 10, 30, 90 days
Compatibility (C) (with existing hardware and software) β1, β2, β3
Consider, for example, the pair of attributes Quality and Warranty. The value of war-
ranty is diﬀerent for diﬀerent values of quality; it is higher when the quality is known to
be low, and lower when the quality is known to be high. The two attributes therefore de-
pend on each other. Furthermore, we might expect that Volume complements both Quality
and Warranty. Larger hard drives are more prone to failures, making the quality and war-
ranty more valuable. Similarly, there is interdependence between Supplier ranking and the
contract insurance we buy, and between Supplier ranking and the warranty the supplier pro-
vides. Other reasonable dependencies are among Delivery, Insurance, and Payment timeline
(e.g., later delivery requires better insurance, later payment reduces the need for insurance),
and between Volume to the RPM and Transfer rate. Preferences over compatibility may
not depend on any other attribute. The corresponding CDI map is depicted in Figure 1a.
As described in Section 2.1, the utility function decomposes over the elements of a tree
decomposition of the CDI map. Such a tree decomposition is depicted in Figure 1b. In this
example the set of elements of the tree decomposition correspond exactly to the maximal
cliques of the CDI map. In general the tree decomposition might include supersets of the
maximal cliques, but the decomposition can obviously be maintained over the supersets as
well.
Non-additive traders, if required to deal with an additive price space as in auction
AD (Parkes & Kalagnanam, 2005), face an exposure problem, somewhat analogous to traders
with combinatorial preferences that participate in simultaneous auctions (Wellman, Ose-
payshvili, MacKie-Mason, & Reeves, 2008).
Essentially, the problem can manifest itself
490

GAI Auctions
(a)
(b)
Figure 1: HD procurement problem: (a) CDI map, (b) GAI tree.
in two ways. One type of exposure occurs from one auction round to another, as in the
following two-attribute example. A seller’s conditional preference order over an attribute
a may be optimized at an assignment a1 given that the other attribute b is at b1, but if
the assignment of b changes, a1 may become arbitrarily suboptimal. Therefore bidding a1
and b1 may result in a poor allocation if the seller is outbid on b1 (and thus must resort to
another assignment) but left winning a1. The second exposure occurs in any single round
of the auction, if a trader bids on multiple conﬁgurations. For example, suppose conﬁgura-
tions (a1, b1) and (a2, b2) are both optimal at the current prices. Because bids are collected
independently for each attribute, a trader bidding on both may end up with conﬁguration
(a1, b2), which again, may be arbitrarily suboptimal.
We can prevent exposure on the sellers’ part by taking simple measures in the auction
design. First, bids are collected anew each round, independently of previous rounds, hence
the ﬁrst problem is avoided.
Sellers can likewise avoid the second problem by limiting
themselves to bid on one conﬁguration per round.
On the buyer’s side, this solution does not work because we require the buyer to bid
a full set of optimal conﬁgurations in each round, in order to ensure the auction’s conver-
gence (this becomes clearer in Section 6.1). To prevent buyer exposure, our auction design
structures prices according to the buyer’s preferences, and the traders bid on clusters of
interdependent attributes. In terms of the example above, if a and b are interdependent
(meaning CDI({a}, {b}) does not hold), we should be able to bid on the cluster ab. If b in
turn depends on c, we need another cluster bc. This is still simpler than a general pricing
structure that solicits bids for the cluster abc. More generally, we ﬁnd all reasonable CDI
conditions which are correct for the buyer, obtain the corresponding GAI tree decompo-
sition, and solicit bids for clusters of attributes corresponding to these GAI elements. In
Section 4, we describe our auction design in detail, along with an example in Section 5. In
Section 6.1, we prove that the auction terminates with an (approximately) optimal solution
to MAP.
4. GAI Auctions
Before introducing our auction design, we reiterate our model and notation, and provide a
deﬁnition that facilitates the auction presentation.
491

Engel & Wellman
4.1 Notations and Deﬁnitions
In the procurement setting, a single buyer wishes to procure a single good, in some con-
ﬁguration θ ∈Θ from one of the candidate sellers s1, . . . , sm. The buyer has some private
valuation function ub : Θ →ℜ+, and similarly each seller si has a private cost function, ci.
Both ub(·) and ci(·) are MVFs, for which utility diﬀerences express diﬀerences in willingness-
to-pay, as explained in Section 2.1. Assume that the buyer’s preferences are reﬂected in a
GAI structure I1, . . . , Ig. We call an assignment to GAI element Ir a sub-conﬁguration. We
use θr to denote the sub-conﬁguration formed by projecting conﬁguration θ to element Ir.
Deﬁnition 13 (Consistent Cover). A collection of sub-conﬁgurations {α1, . . . , αg}, where
for each r ∈{1, . . . , g}, αr is an instantiation of Ir, is a consistent cover if for any
r, r′ ∈{1, . . . , g}, and any attribute aj ∈Ir ∩Ir′, αr and αr′ agree on the assignment
to aj.
In words, a consistent cover is a collection of sub-conﬁgurations from which we can
compose a valid conﬁguration. A collection {α1, . . . , αg} which is a consistent cover can
equivalently be considered a conﬁguration, which we denote by (α1, . . . , αg). For example,
consider a good with three attributes: a, b, c. Each attribute’s domain has two possible
assignments (e.g., {a1, a2} is the domain of a). Let the GAI structure be I1 = {a, b}, I2 =
{b, c}. Here, sub-conﬁgurations are assignments of the form a1b1, a1b2, b1c1, and so on. The
set of sub-conﬁgurations {a1b1, b1c1} is a consistent cover, corresponding to the conﬁguration
a1b1c1. In contrast, the set {a1b1, b2c1} is inconsistent.
4.2 The GAI Auction
We deﬁne an iterative, descending-price multiattribute auction that maintains a GAI pric-
ing structure: that is, in any round t, there is a price pt(·), corresponding to each sub-
conﬁguration of each GAI element.
The price pt(θ) of a conﬁguration θ at round t is
deﬁned in terms of the sub-conﬁguration prices and a global discount term ∆,
pt(θ) =
g
"
r=1
pt(θr) −∆.
(7)
Importantly, the elements θr may refer to overlapping attributes. Bidders submit sub-
bids on sub-conﬁgurations and on the global discount ∆.3 Sub-bids are submitted in each
round and they expire in the next round.
A sub-bid in round t for conﬁguration θr is
automatically assigned the price pt(θr). The set of full bids of a seller contains all consistent
covers that can be generated from that seller’s current set of sub-bids. The existence of a
full bid over a conﬁguration θ represents the seller’s willingness to accept the price pt(θ) for
supplying θ.
At the start of the auction, the buyer reports (to the auction, not to sellers) a complete
valuation function ub(·). Under GAI, this can be expressed in decomposed form (6) with
local functions (fb,1, . . . , fb,g), such that ub(θ) = %
r fb,r(θr).
The initial prices of sub-
conﬁgurations are set at some level above the buyer’s valuations, that is, p1(θr) > fb,r(θr) for
all θr. The discount ∆is initialized to zero. The auction has the dynamics of a descending
3. The discount term could be replaced with a uniform price reduction across all sub-conﬁgurations.
492

GAI Auctions
clock auction: at each round t, bids are collected for current prices and then prices are
reduced according to price rules. A seller is considered active in a round if the set of sub-
bids she submitted contains at least one full bid. In round t > 1, only sellers who were
active in round t −1 are allowed to participate, and the auction terminates when no more
than a single seller is active. We denote the set of sub-bids submitted by si by Bt
i, and the
corresponding set of full bids is
Bt
i = {θ = (θ1, . . . , θg) ∈Θ | {θ1, . . . , θg} ⊆Bt
i}.
In the example of Section 4.1, a seller could submit sub-bids on a set of sub-conﬁgurations
such as {a1b1, b1c1}, and that combines to a full bid on a1b1c1.
The auction proceeds in two phases. In the ﬁrst phase (A), at each round t the auction
computes a set of buyer-preferred sub-conﬁgurations Mt: those sub-conﬁgurations that are
part of a conﬁguration which is within ϵ of being proﬁt-maximizing for the buyer at the
current prices. Formally, we ﬁrst deﬁne the buyer proﬁt from a conﬁguration θ as4
πt
b(θ) = ub(θ) −pt(θ).
The buyer-preferred set of sub-conﬁgurations is then deﬁned by:
Mt = {θr | πt
b(θ) ≥max
θ′∈Θ πt
b(θ′) −ϵ, r = 1, . . . , g}.
In Section 6.2 we show how Mt can be computed eﬃciently. We stress that though Mt
is a set of sub-conﬁgurations, the criterion for selecting them is based on the proﬁt over
full conﬁgurations. Proﬁts over individual sub-conﬁgurations are meaningless outside the
context of conﬁgurations.
In Phase A, the auction adjusts prices after each round, reducing the price of every
sub-conﬁguration that has received a bid but is not in the buyer’s preferred set. Let ϵ be
the prespeciﬁed price decrement parameter. Speciﬁcally, the Phase A price change rule is
applied to all θr ∈#m
i=1 Bt
i \ Mt:
pt+1(θr) ←pt(θr) −ϵ
g .
[A]
Let Mt denote the set of conﬁgurations that are consistent covers in Mt:
Mt = {θ = (θ1, . . . , θg) ∈Θ | {θ1, . . . , θg} ⊆Mt}.
The auction switches to Phase B when all active sellers have at least one full bid in the
buyer’s preferred set:
∀i. Bt
i = ∅∨Bt
i ∩Mt ̸= ∅.
[SWITCH]
Let T be the round at which [SWITCH] becomes true. At this point, the auction selects
the buyer-optimal full bid ηi for each seller si.
ηi = arg max
θ∈BT
i
(πT
b (θ)).
(8)
4. We drop the t superscript in generic statements involving price and proﬁt functions, understanding that
all usage is with respect to the (currently) applicable prices.
493

Engel & Wellman
In Phase B, si may bid only on ηi. Sub-conﬁguration prices are ﬁxed at pT(·) during this
phase. The only adjustment is to ∆, which is increased in every round by ϵ. By (7), any
increase of ∆decreases the current price of each of the conﬁgurations ηi.
The auction
terminates when at most one seller (if exactly one, designate it sˆi) is active. The allocation
is determined according to four distinct cases:
1. All sellers drop out in Phase A (i.e., before rule [SWITCH] holds).
The auction
terminates with no allocation.
2. All active sellers drop out in the same round in Phase B.
Of all the sellers that
dropped in the last round, the auction selects a seller si for which ub(ηi) −pT (ηi)
is maximal, and designates that seller as the winner sˆi. With a single winner, the
appropriate case 3 or 4 is applied.
3. The auction terminates in Phase B with a ﬁnal price above the buyer’s valuation,
pT (ηˆi) −∆> ub(ηˆi). It is still possible that there is exactly one seller (the winning
seller) whose cost is below the buyer’s valuation, in which case a trade with positive
surplus is possible.
Therefore, the auction oﬀers the winner sˆi an opportunity to
supply ηˆi at price ub(ηˆi).
4. The auction terminates in Phase B with a ﬁnal price pT (ηˆi) −∆≤ub(ηˆi). This is the
ideal situation, where the auction allocates the chosen conﬁguration and seller at this
resulting price.
Collect a reported valuation, ub(·) from the buyer;
Set high initial prices, p1(θr) on each sub-conﬁguration θr, and set ∆= 0;
while not [SWITCH], and at least one active seller do
Collect sub-bids from sellers;
Compute Mt;
Apply price change by [A];
end
Compute ηi;
while more than one active seller do
Increase ∆by ϵ;
Collect bids on (ηi, ∆) from sellers;
end
Implement allocation and payment to winning seller;
Algorithm 1: GAI-based multiattribute auction.
The overall auction is described by high-level pseudocode in Algorithm 1.
The role
of Phase A is to guide the traders to their eﬃcient conﬁgurations (MMP solutions), by
reducing prices on conﬁgurations that are chosen by at least one seller but not preferred by
the buyer. The price reduction makes such conﬁgurations slightly less attractive to the seller
and slightly more attractive to the buyer. Phase B is a one-dimensional competition over
the proﬁt that remaining seller candidates can provide to the buyer. In the next section
we formalize these notions, and prove that Phase A indeed converges and that Phase B
494

GAI Auctions
I1
I2
a1b1
a2b1
a1b2
a2b2
b1c1
b2c1
b1c2
b2c2
fb
65
50
55
70
50
85
60
75
f1
35
20
30
70
65
65
70
61
f2
35
20
25
25
55
110
70
95
Table 3: GAI utility functions for the example domain. fb represents the buyer’s valuation,
and f1 and f2 costs of sellers s1 and s2.
selects a seller whose eﬃcient conﬁguration yields (approximately) the highest surplus. In
Section 6.2 we discuss the computational tasks associated with the auction.
5. GAI Auction Example
We illustrate the auction with a simple three-attribute scenario, employing the two-element
GAI structure I1 = {a, b}, I2 = {b, c}.
Table 3 shows the GAI utilities for the buyer
and the two sellers s1, s2. The eﬃcient allocation is (s1, a1b2c1): the buyer’s valuation is
55+85 = 140 and the cost of s1 for this conﬁguration (boldface in the table) is 30+65 = 95,
hence the surplus is 45. The maximal surplus of the second-best seller, s2, is 25, achieved
by a1b1c1, a2b1c1, and a2b2c2. We set all initial prices over I1 to 75, all initial prices over
I2 to 90, and ϵ = 8, meaning that price reduction for sub-conﬁgurations (ϵ/g) is 4.
For the sake of the example we assume that each seller bids in each round on the conﬁg-
uration that maximizes her proﬁt (price minus cost), with respect to prices of the current
round. In the next section we provide formal deﬁnitions and prove incentive properties for
this strategy.
Table 4 shows the progress of Phase A. Initially all conﬁguration have the same price
(165), so sellers bid on their lowest-cost conﬁguration—a2b1c1 for both (with proﬁt 80 to s1
and 90 to s2)—realized by sub-bids on a2b1 and b1c1. M1 contains the sub-conﬁgurations
a2b2 and b2c1 of the highest value conﬁguration a2b2c1, which yields buyer proﬁt of −10.
As we show in the next section (Lemma 7), this maximum does not change throughout
Phase A. Price is therefore decreased on a2b1 and b1c1. After the price change, the proﬁt
of s1 for a2b1c1 is 72, and because she has higher proﬁt (74) on a1b2c2 she bids on a1b2 and
b2c2. Now (round 2) their prices go down, reducing the proﬁt on a1b2c2 to 66 and therefore
in round 3 s1 prefers a2b1c2 (proﬁt 67). Note that at this point the conﬁguration a2b2c2
yields proﬁt of −16 to the buyer, which is within ϵ of the maximal buyer’s proﬁt (-10),
hence b2c2 is marked to be in M3.
After the next price change, the conﬁgurations a1b2c1 and a1b2c2 both become optimal
for s1 (proﬁt 66), and the sub-bids a1b2, b2c1 and b2c2 capture the two. These conﬁgurations
stay optimal for another round (5), with proﬁt 62. In round 5 the proﬁt for conﬁguration
a1b2c1 is 140 −157 = −17, which is within ϵ of maximizing the buyer’s proﬁt, therefore
the sub-conﬁguration a1b2 is added to M5. At this point s1 has a full bid (in fact two full
bids: a1b2c2 and a1b2c1) in M5, and she no longer changes her bids because the price of
her optimal conﬁgurations does not decrease. Seller s2 however sticks to a2b1c1 during the
495

Engel & Wellman
I1
I2
t
a1b1
a2b1
a1b2
a2b2
b1c1
b2c1
b1c2
b2c2
1
75
75
75
75
90
90
90
90
s1, s2
∗
s1, s2
∗
2
75
71
75
75
86
90
90
90
s2
s1
∗
s2
∗
s1
3
75
67
71
75
82
90
90
86
s1, s2
∗
s2
∗
s1
∗
4
75
63
71
75
78
90
86
86
s2
s1
∗
s2
∗, s1
∗, s1
5
75
59
67
75
74
90
86
86
s2
∗, s1
∗
s2
∗, s1
∗, s1
6
71
59
67
75
70
90
86
86
s2
∗, s1
∗
∗, s1
s2
∗, s1
7
71
55
67
75
70
90
82
86
s2
∗, s1
∗
s2
∗, s1
∗, s1
8
67
55
67
75
66
90
82
86
∗
s2
∗, s1
∗
∗
∗, s1
s2
∗, s1
9
67
51
67
75
66
90
78
86
∗, s2
∗, s1
∗
∗, s2
∗, s1
∗, s1
Table 4: Auction progression in Phase A. Sell bids and designation of Mt (using ∗) are
shown below the price of each sub-conﬁguration.
ﬁrst four rounds, switching to a1b1c1 in round 5. It takes four more rounds for s2 and Mt
to converge (M9 ∩B9
2 = {a1b1c1}).
After round 9, the auction sets η1 = a1b2c1 (which yields more buyer proﬁt than a1b2c2)
and η2 = a1b1c1. In the second phase, which starts at this point, the sellers compete on the
amount of surplus they transfer to the buyer, whose proﬁt consequently becomes positive.
For the next round (10) ∆= 8, increased by 8 for each subsequent round.
Note that
p9(a1b1c1) = 133, and c2(a1b1c1) = 90, therefore the proﬁt of s2 at this point is 43. In
round 15, ∆= 48 meaning p15(a1b1c1) = 85 and that causes s2 to drop out because his
proﬁt becomes negative. This ends the auction, and sets the ﬁnal allocation to (s1, a1b2c1)
and pT (a1b2c1) = 157 −48 = 109. That leaves the buyer with a proﬁt of 31 and s1 with a
proﬁt of 14.
6. Analysis
We analyze the economic properties of the auction in Section 6.1, and address practical and
computational issues in Section 6.2.
6.1 Economic Properties
We adopt the following assumptions for this discussion:
A1 The optimal (seller, conﬁguration) pair provides non-negative surplus.
A2 ub(·) is the real utility function of the buyer.
496

GAI Auctions
When the optimal solution to MAP (3) provides negative surplus and sellers do not bid
below their cost, the auction terminates in Phase A, no trade occurs, and the auction is
trivially eﬃcient. Therefore Assumption A1 does not cause loss of generality. A2 can be
interpreted as follows: given non-truthful buyer report, our eﬃciency results below apply
to the face value of the buyer’s report rather than to the true utility.
6.1.1 Properties of the buyer’s profit function
For µ ⊆{1, . . . , g}, we deﬁne the (partial) proﬁt from a set of of sub-conﬁgurations θµ
corresponding to µ as
πb(θµ) =
"
r∈µ
(fb,r(θr) −p(θr)).
The functions f come from the GAI breakdown of ub as in (6).
Lemma 4. For any µ and its complement ¯µ,
πb(θ) = πb(θµ) + πb(θ¯µ)
Proof. From (6) and from the deﬁnition of πb(θµ) we get
πb(θ) =
"
r∈µ
(fb,r(θr) −p(θr)) +
"
r∈¯µ
(fb,r(θr) −p(θr)) = πb(θµ) + πb(θ¯µ).
In round 5 of the example in the previous section, the sub-conﬁguration a1b2 is placed in
M because the conﬁguration a1b2c1 is within ϵ of the maximal buyer proﬁt −10. Actually,
at that point not only a1b2c1 is added to Mt, but also a1b2c2 whose buyer proﬁt (−23) is
not within ϵ of the maximum. If a1b2c2 is later selected as ηi for some si this could lead to
additional eﬃciency loss, beyond ϵ. The following lemma bounds this potential loss.
Lemma 5. Let Ψ be a set of conﬁgurations, all within ϵ of maximizing proﬁt for a trader τ
(buyer or seller) at given prices. Let Φ = {θr | θ ∈Ψ, r ∈{1, . . . , g}}. Then any consistent
cover in Φ is within gϵ of maximizing proﬁt for τ under the same prices.
In particular, if Ψ includes only exactly optimal conﬁgurations, any consistent cover will
be exactly optimal as well. The proof (in Appendix B.1) relies on our deﬁnition of the GAI
decomposition as a tree decomposition, and uses the partial proﬁt function deﬁned above
along with Lemma 4.
The bound above is tight, in that for any GAI tree and nontrivial domain we can
construct an example set Ψ as above in which there exists a consistent cover whose utility
is exactly gϵ below the maximal.
As a result we get the following corollary.
Corollary 6.
∀θ ∈Mt. πt
b(θ) ≥max
θ′∈Θ πt
b(θ′) −gϵ
497

Engel & Wellman
Proof. Apply Lemma 5 for πt
b: deﬁne Ψ as the set of conﬁgurations within ϵ of maxθ′∈Θ πt
b(θ′).
Mt, by its deﬁnition, serves as Φ in the lemma. Mt is then exactly the set of consistent
covers over Φ, and hence each θ ∈Mt must be within gϵ of the optimum maxθ′∈Θ πt
b(θ′).
We now show that, as noted in the example, the maximal proﬁt of the buyer does not
change during Phase A.
Lemma 7. maxθ∈Θ πt
b(θ) = maxθ∈Θ π1
b(θ) for any round t of Phase A.
Proof. Assume there exists some θ′ for which πt+1
b
(θ′) > πt
b(θ′). Then necessarily pt+1(θ′) =
pt(θ′) −δ for some δ > 0. The only price change is by Rule [A], meaning that some w ≤g
sub-conﬁgurations of θ′ are not in Mt, and δ = wϵ
g . In that case, by deﬁnition of Mt,
πt
b(θ′) < max
θ∈Θ πt
b(θ) −ϵ.
Therefore,
πt+1
b
(θ′) = πt(θ′) + δ = πt(θ′) + wϵ
g ≤πt(θ′) + gϵ
g < max
θ∈Θ πt
b(θ).
This is true for any θ′ whose proﬁt improves, therefore maxθ∈Θ πt
b(θ) does not change
during Phase A, and hence equals its value in round 1.
6.1.2 Straightforward bidding sellers
We now turn our attention to the sellers’ behavior. We ﬁrst deﬁne the proﬁt function of
seller si by πt
i(θ) = pt(θ) −ci(θ).
Deﬁnition 14 (Straightforward Bidder). A seller is called a straightforward bidder (SB)
if at each round t she bids on Bt
i as follows: if maxθ∈Θ πt
i(θ) < 0, then Bt
i = ∅. Otherwise
select bt
i ∈arg maxθ∈Θ πt
i(θ), and set
Bt
i = {θr | θ ∈bt
i, r ∈{1, . . . , g}}.
Intuitively, SB sellers follow a myopic best response strategy, optimizing proﬁt with
respect to current prices. This approach was termed “straightforward” by Milgrom (2000)
in the sense that agents bid myopically, rather than strategically anticipating subsequent
price responses.
SB sellers can choose any optimal conﬁguration to bid on; none of the results proved
below is aﬀected by this choice. It is also important to note that SB sellers ﬁnd their optimal
full conﬁguration bt
i, rather than optimize each GAI element separately. The conﬁguration bt
i
is translated to its set of sub-conﬁgurations Bt
i. In order to calculate bt
i, seller si needs to ﬁnd
the optimum of her current proﬁt function. In Section 6.2 we show that this optimization
problem is tractable under the assumption that ui(·), too, has a compact GAI structure.
The following is an immediate corollary of the deﬁnition of SB.
Corollary 8. For SB seller si,
∀t, ∀θ ∈Bt
i. πt
i(θ) = max
θ′∈Θ πt
i(θ′).
498

GAI Auctions
In general, sellers’ preference structure may not coincide with the auction’s price struc-
ture. Nevertheless, Corollary 8 holds by deﬁnition of SB, because Bt
i (deﬁned in Section 4.2)
contains a single conﬁguration which is the submitted bid bt
i. Alternatively, the deﬁnition
of SB can be modiﬁed, so sellers with GAI preferences consistent with the auction’s price
structure can bid on multiple optimal conﬁgurations (if such exist). If sellers bid on multiple
conﬁgurations, this can speed up convergence. In that case bt
i denotes a set of submitted
conﬁgurations, Bt
i denotes the respective collection of sub-conﬁgurations, and Bt
i is the set
of consistent covers over Bt
i. Lemma 5 (with ϵ = 0) entails that Corollary 8 still holds.
However, for simplicity of the analysis we retain Deﬁnition 14.
6.1.3 Efficiency given SB
Lemma 9 states that through the price system and price change rules, Phase A leads the
buyer and each of the sellers to their mutually eﬃcient conﬁguration. Formally, we are
interested in maximizing the function σi : Θ →ℜ, which represents the surplus ub(·)−ci(·).
For any prices pt,
σi(θ) = πt
b(θ) + πt
i(θ).
Lemma 9. For SB seller si, ηi is gϵ-eﬃcient:
σi(ηi) ≥max
θ∈Θ σi(θ) −gϵ.
Proof. Conﬁguration ηi is chosen to maximize the buyer’s proﬁt out of Bt
i at the end of
Phase A. Because Bt
i ∩Mt ̸= ∅, a conﬁguration ηi ∈Mt is available in Bt
i, hence one
must be chosen to maximize buyer’s utility. For any ˜θ, and for any ηi ∈Bt
i, we get from
Corollary 8,
πT
i (ηi) ≥πT
i (˜θ),
and from Corollary 6, we get for any ηi ∈Mt,
πT
b (ηi) ≥πT
b (˜θ) −gϵ.
Because ηi ∈Bt
i ∩Mt we can add up the two inequalities and get σi(ηi) ≥σi(˜θ) −gϵ, which
is the desired result.
Based on Phase B’s simple role as a single-dimensional bidding competition over the
discount, we next assert that the overall result is eﬃcient under SB, which in turn (Sec-
tion 6.1.4) proves to be an approximately ex-post equilibrium strategy in the two phases.
Theorem 10. Given a truthful buyer and SB sellers, the surplus of the ﬁnal allocation is
within (g + 1)ϵ of the maximal surplus.
Proof Sketch: we ﬁrst establish that the auction must reach Phase B. To do that, we
show that in each round of Phase A, a price of at least one sub-conﬁguration is reduced,
whereas by Lemma 7, maxθ∈Θ πt
b(θ) does not change. The latter enforces a lower bound
on how far prices can be reduced within Phase A, hence Phase A must terminate. Because
initial prices are above the buyer’s valuation, a seller whose surplus (MMP solution) is
positive cannot drop during that phase, so using Assumption A1 we show that the only way
499

Engel & Wellman
for Phase A to terminate is by reaching condition [SWITCH]. Next, we show that for any
two sellers, the surplus of the ﬁrst to drop from the auction cannot be signiﬁcantly higher
than that of the one who stayed longer. This ensures that the winning seller is the eﬃcient
one, or one whose MMP surplus is almost maximal, and from Lemma 9 the auction must
obtain (almost) all of that surplus. The full proof is given in Appendix B.2.
The bound guaranteed by Theorem 10 is a worst-case bound, and as shown experimen-
tally in the following sections the auction typically achieves eﬃciency closer to the optimum.
In the example of Section 5, the diﬀerence in the eﬃciencies of the two sellers is lower than
the potential eﬃciency loss (as (g + 1)ϵ = 24). However, for that instance it is still guar-
anteed that s1 wins, either with the eﬃcient allocation, or with a1b2c2 which provides a
surplus of 39. The reason is that these are the only two conﬁgurations of s1 with surplus
within gϵ = 16 of the solution to MMP(b, s1), hence by Lemma 9 one of them must be cho-
sen as η1. Both of these conﬁgurations provide more than ϵ surplus over s2’s most eﬃcient
conﬁguration, and this is suﬃcient in order to win in Phase B.
The bound of Theorem 10 can be improved when the CDI map contains disconnected
components. For example, when a fully additive decomposition (as assumed in previous
literature) does exist, the CDI map contains a disconnected component for each attribute.
To take advantage of this disconnectedness we create a separate tree decomposition for
each disconnected components.
The deﬁnition of M has to be adapted to apportion ϵ
proportionally across the disconnected trees. Formally, we redeﬁne Mt as follows.
Deﬁnition 15 (Buyer’s Preferred Set). Let G be comprised of trees G1, . . . , Gh. Let
θj denote the projection of a conﬁguration θ on the tree Gj, and gj the number of GAI
elements in Gj. Similarly, Θj denotes the projection of Θ on Gj. Deﬁne
Mt
j = {θr | πt
b(θj) ≥max
θ′
j∈Θj
πt
b(θ′
j) −gj
ϵ
g, r ∈Gj}.
The buyer’s preferred set is given by Mt = #h
j=1 Mt
j.
Let ej = gj −1 denote the number of edges in Gj. We deﬁne a connectivity parameter,
e = maxj=1,...,h ej. It turns out that e + 1 can replace g in the approximation results. The
ﬁrst step is to replace Corollary 6 with this tighter bound on the optimality of conﬁgurations
in Mt.
Corollary 11.
∀θ ∈Mt. πt
b(θ) ≥max
θ′∈Θ πt
b(θ′) −(e + 1)ϵ
Proof. We apply Lemma 5 for each Gj, but with gj ϵ
g instead of ϵ, hence any consistent cover
over Mt
j is within gj ϵ
ggj of maxθ′
j∈Θj πt
b(θ′
j). From Lemma 4, we get that any consistent
cover over Mt (meaning any conﬁguration in Mt) is within %h
r=1 gj ϵ
ggj of maxθ′∈Θ πt
b(θ′).
As e + 1 = maxj=1,...,h gj, this is bounded by ϵ
g
%h
r=1 gj(e + 1) = ϵ(e + 1).
We can now obtain a tighter eﬃciency result.
Theorem 12. Given a truthful buyer and SB sellers, the surplus of the ﬁnal allocation is
within (e + 2)ϵ of the maximal surplus.
500

GAI Auctions
In the fully additive case this loss of eﬃciency reduces to 2ϵ. On the other extreme,
if the CDI map is connected then e + 1 = g, reducing Theorem 12 to Theorem 10. If we
do not assume any preference structure for the buyer, meaning that the CDI map is fully
connected, then e = 0 and the eﬃciency loss is again proportional to ϵ.
6.1.4 Sellers’ incentives to use SB
Following Parkes and Kalagnanam (2005), we relate our auction to the Vickrey-Clarke-
Groves (VCG) mechanism to establish incentive properties for the sellers. In the one-sided
multiattribute VCG auction, the buyer reports valuation ub, the sellers report cost functions
ˆci, and the buyer pays the sell-side VCG payment to the winning seller.
Deﬁnition 16 (Sell-Side VCG Payment). Let (θ∗, i∗) be an optimal solution to MAP.
Let (˜θ,˜i) be the best solution to MAP when i∗does not participate. The sell-side VCG
payment is
VCG(ub, ˆci) = ub(θ∗) −max(0, ub(˜θ) −ˆc˜i(˜θ)).
It is well known that truthful bidding is a dominant strategy for sellers in the one-sided
VCG auction. Parkes and Kalagnanam (2005) showed that the maximal regret for buyers
from bidding truthfully in this mechanism is ub(θ∗) −ci∗(θ∗) −(ub(˜θ) −ˆc˜i(˜θ)), that is, the
marginal product of the eﬃcient seller.
As typical for iterative auctions, the VCG outcome is not exactly achieved, but the
deviation is bounded by the minimal price change.
Deﬁnition 17 (δ-VCG Payment). A sell-side δ-VCG payment for MAP is a payment p
such that
VCG(ub, ˆci) −δ ≤p ≤VCG(ub, ˆci) + δ.
When payment is guaranteed to be δ-VCG, sellers can aﬀect their payment only within
that range, hence their gain from falsely reporting cost is bounded by 2δ.
Lemma 13. When sellers are SB, the GAI auction payment is sell-side (e + 2)ϵ-VCG.
In the example of Section 5, the proﬁt of the winner (14) is less than ϵ below his VCG
proﬁt 20.
The proof (in Appendix B.4) also covers Case 3 in the allocation options of
Section 4.2, in which we force the payment to equal ub(ηˆi).
We are now ready for our ﬁnal result of this section, showing that the approximately
eﬃcient outcome guaranteed by Theorem 12 is achieved in an (approximate) ex-post Nash
equilibrium.
Theorem 14. SB is a (3e + 5)ϵ ex-post Nash equilibrium for sellers in the GAI auction.
That is, sellers cannot gain more than (3e + 5)ϵ by deviating from SB, given that other
sellers follow SB.
In order to exploit even this bounded potential gain, sellers need to know, for a given
conﬁguration in Mt, whether it was explicitly selected as approximately optimal for the
buyer, or it is a combination of sub-conﬁgurations from approximately optimal conﬁgura-
tions. It seems highly unlikely for sellers to have such information. They are more likely to
lose if they do not bid on their myopically optimal conﬁgurations.
501

Engel & Wellman
6.2 Computation and Complexity
The advantage of GAI auctions over an additive auction such as AD (Parkes & Kalagnanam,
2005) is in economic eﬃciency: by accommodating expressive bidding, the eﬃciency results
are with respect to a more accurate utility function. In contrast, the key advantage with re-
spect to an auction that does not employ preference structures, such as auction NLD (Parkes
& Kalagnanam, 2005), is in computational eﬃciency. The property we show in this section
is that all computations are exponential only in the size of the largest GAI element, rather
than in |A|. In particular, the size of the price space the auction maintains is equal to the
total number of sub-conﬁgurations. This number is exponential in the treewidth (plus one)
of the original CDI map.5 To ensure computational tractability, one can deﬁne a priori a
constant C, and force the treewidth of the CDI map to be bounded by C by ignoring some of
the interdependencies. This is still much better than using an additive representation that
ignores all interdependencies. The constant represents a tradeoﬀbetween economic and
computational eﬃciency; a larger C supports a more accurate preference representation,
but the GAI elements may be larger.
For the purpose of computational analysis, let I = #g
r=1
!
aj∈Ir D(aj), that is the col-
lection of all sub-conﬁgurations. Since Mt grows monotonically with t, na¨ıve generation
of the best outcomes sequentially might end up enumerating signiﬁcant portions of the
domain. Fortunately, this enumeration can be avoided, and the complexity of this compu-
tation (as well as the optimization performed by the seller) grows only with |I|, that is, no
computation depends on the size of the exponential domain.
Theorem 15. The computation of Mt can be performed in time O(g|I|2). Moreover, the
total time spent on this task throughout the auction is O(g|I|(|I| + T)).
We obtain a bound on T, the number of rounds of Phase A, by comparing the sum of
prices of all sub-conﬁgurations in rounds 1 and T.
Theorem 16. The number of rounds required by the auction is bounded by
T ≤
"
θr∈I
p1(θr)g
ϵ .
Proof. Let Σi = %
θr∈I pi(θr) (the sum of prices of all sub-conﬁgurations in round i).
Assume that Σi < 0 for some 1 ≤i ≤T. Then because ub(·) ≥0, there must exist θ ∈Θ
for which πi
b(θ) > 0. Because we chose initial prices such that for all θ ∈Θ, π1
b(θ) < 0,
this contradicts Lemma 7. Therefore, ΣT ≥0, hence the sum of prices cannot be reduced
by more than Σ1 = %
θr∈I p1(θr) throughout the auction. Also, in each round at least one
price is reduced by g
ϵ. This leads to the required result.
This bound is rather loose—its purpose is to ensure that the number of rounds does
not depend on the size of the non-factored domain.
It depends on the number of sub-
conﬁgurations, and on the result of dividing the initial price by the minimum price decre-
ment. Usually Phase A converges much faster. Let the initial negative proﬁt chosen by
the auctioneer be m = maxθ∈Θ π1
b(θ).
In the worst case, Phase A needs to run until
5. The use of the term treewidth is subject to using an optimal tree decomposition.
502

GAI Auctions
∀θ ∈Θ. πb(θ) = m. This happens for example when ∀θr ∈I. pt(θr) = fb,r(θr) + m
g . That
implies that the closer the initial prices reﬂect the buyer’s valuation, the faster Phase A
converges. One extreme choice is to set p1(θr) = fb,r(θr) + m
g . That would make Phase A
redundant, at the cost of full initial revelation of the buyer’s valuation (Section 2.3). Be-
tween this option and the other extreme, which is ∀α, ˆα ∈I. p1(α) = p1(ˆα), the auctioneer
has a range of choices to determine the right tradeoﬀbetween convergence time and infor-
mation revelation. In the example of Section 5, the choice of a lower initial price for the
domain of I1 provides some speedup by revealing a harmless amount of information. In our
simulations below, we also set constant initial prices within each GAI element.
Furthermore, many domains have natural dependencies that are mutual to traders, in
which case the price structure used by the auction may also accommodate sellers’ preference
structures. If so, sellers can bid on multiple equally proﬁtable conﬁgurations in each round,
thus speeding up convergence, as discussed above in Section 6.1.
We also consider computational complexity of the SB strategy for sellers.
Theorem 17. Let ρb denote the treewidth of the CDI map of ub(·), and let ρi denote the
treewidth of the CDI map of ui(·). The optimization of ui(·) −p(·) takes time exponential
in ρb + ρi in the worst case.
Proof. Consider the graph G which includes the union of the edges of the two CDI maps.
The treewidth of G is ρb + ρi in the worst case. By deﬁnition, the price function p(·) is
decomposed according to ub(·), hence ui(·)−p(·) decomposes according to the additive GAI
factors of ui(·) and ub(·). Therefore, for any pair of attributes x and y which have a mutual
factor in ui(·) −p(·), there is an edge x, y in G. It is well known that the complexity of
combinatorial optimization is exponential only in the treewidth of such graph—for example,
using cost networks (Dechter, 1997).
Of potential concern may be the communication cost associated with the descending
auction style. The sellers need to send their bids over and over again at each round. A
simple change can be made to avoid much of the redundant communication: the auction
can retain sub-bids from previous rounds on sub-conﬁgurations whose price did not change.
Because combinations of sub-bids from diﬀerent rounds can yield suboptimal conﬁgurations,
each sub-bid should be tagged with the number of the latest round in which it was submitted,
and only consistent combinations from the same round are considered to be full bids. With
this implementation sellers need not resubmit their bid until a price of at least one of its
sub-conﬁgurations has changed.
To summarize, GAI auctions are shown to perform well on the criteria mentioned in Sec-
tion 2.3: they achieve approximate eﬃciency given reasonable incentive properties, they are
expressive enough to accommodate preferences with interdependencies among attributes,
they are tractable when the maximal size of GAI clusters is reasonably bounded, and they
do not require full revelation of utility. Performance on this last criterion is quantiﬁed in
the experimental part of the paper.
7. Experimental Design
The main idea behind GAI auctions is to improve eﬃciency over auctions that assume
additivity, when preferences are not additive. However, (given a ﬁxed ϵ) the theoretical
503

Engel & Wellman
eﬃciency guarantee of GAI auctions depends on e, the connectivity parameter of the GAI
tree. This suggests a tradeoﬀ: complex models more accurately represent true utility, but
can increase approximation error due to higher connectivity. An obvious question is whether
more accurate preference modeling is indeed more eﬃcient, and in particular, whether
GAI auctions are more eﬃcient than additive auctions, given that the preferences are not
additive. To address the question experimentally, we assume that the buyer’s preferences
have some GAI structure, and compare the performance of GAI auctions that model this
structure with the performance of auctions that are restricted to an additive representation.
For the latter, we use an instance of GAI auction in which the pricing structure is additive,
and name it the additive approximating auction (AP). This auction is similar in principle
to auction AD (Parkes & Kalagnanam, 2005).6 To the best of our knowledge, AD is the
only proposed instance of a surplus-maximizing multiattribute auction based on additive
preferences, besides those that require full revelation of the buyer’s utility. In all of the
experiments, sellers employ SB strategies.
In Section 7.1 we describe how random GAI utilities are drawn, and in Section 7.2 we
extend the scheme to generate GAI utility functions that exhibit additional structure. In
Section 7.3 we show how we obtain an additive approximation of these random functions,
allowing us to simulate auction AD. The results of the simulations are presented in Section 8.
7.1 GAI Random Utility
We performed simulations using randomly generated utility functions representing the
buyer’s value function and sellers’ cost functions. Our random utility generation proce-
dure follows the utility elicitation procedure suggested by Braziunas and Boutilier (2005),
and uses a two-step process: ﬁrst we create local utility functions over each GAI element,
normalized to the range [0, 1]. Next, we draw scaling constants that represent the relative
weight of each local function in the overall utility.
More formally, let ¯ur(Ir) = u([Ir]) denote a local utility function over Ir, each normalized
to [0, 1]. Next, let ¯fr(Ir) be deﬁned according to the GAI functional form of Eq. (6), with
u([Ir]) replaced with ¯ur(Ir), hence
¯f1
=
¯u1(I1), and
for r = 2, . . . , g,
¯fr
=
¯ur(Ir) +
r−1
"
j=1
(−1)j
"
1≤i1<···<ij<r
¯ur([
j$
s=1
Iis ∩Ir]).
(9)
Braziunas and Boutilier (2005) show that for GAI-structured utility, there exist scaling
constants λr ∈[0, 1] such that
¯u(A) =
g
"
r=1
λr ¯fr(Ir).
(10)
6. Both auctions employ an additive price space that drives bidders to their eﬃcient conﬁgurations. AD is
eﬃcient up to ϵ when the buyer and all the sellers have additive preferences. GAI auctions are ϵ-eﬃcient
given additive buyer’s preferences, and make no assumption regarding sellers’ preference.
There are
some more structural diﬀerences: (i) AD employs more complicated price change rules, in order to allow
sellers to ignore some of the attributes, (ii) discounts can be used in any stage of AD, and the auction
selects a provisional winner at each iteration.
504

GAI Auctions
We refer to the functions ¯ur(Ir) as subutility functions. Note that values of the form
¯ur([Iir ∩Iir′]) are drawn only once and used in both ¯ur(Ir) and ¯ur(Iir′). This representation
lets us draw random GAI functions, for a given GAI tree structure, using the following
steps:
1. Draw random subutility functions ¯ur(Ir), r = 1, . . . , g in the range [0,1].
2. Compute ¯fr(·), r = 1, . . . , g using (9).
3. Draw random scaling constants λr, such that %g
r=1 λr = 1, and compute ¯u(A) by
(10).
The scaling constants represent the importance the decision maker accords to corresponding
GAI elements in the overall decision. The procedure results in utilities that are normalized
in [0, 1]. Finally, for each particular trader we draw mean µ and variance σ, and scale ¯u(·)
to the range [µ −σ, µ + σ], resulting in the utility functions ub(·) and ui(·) for i = 1, . . . , m.
7.2 Structured Subutility
A subutility function in the model above may represent any valuation over the subspace.
In practice we may often ﬁnd additional structure within each GAI element. We introduce
two structures which we consider most typical and generally applicable, and we use them
for the simulations, along with completely random local functions.
As we argue in Section 2.1, typical purchase and sale decisions exhibit FOPI (ﬁrst
order preferential independence), meaning that most or all single attributes have a natural
ordering of quality. For example, hard-drive buyers always prefer more memory, higher
RPM, longer warranty, and so on. To implement FOPI, we let the integer values of each
attribute represent its quality. For example, if a belongs to some GAI element Ir = {a, b},
we make sure that ¯ur(ai, b′) ≥¯ur(aj, b′) for any ai > aj, ai, aj ∈D(a), and any b′ ∈D(b).
This must of course hold for any attribute a that is FOPI, and any GAI element Ir that
includes a. We enforce the condition after all the values for that GAI element have been
drawn, through a special-purpose sorting procedure, applied between steps 1 and 2 above.
The FOPI condition makes the random utility function more realistic, and in particular
more appropriate to the target application. Once attributes exhibit FOPI, the dependencies
among diﬀerent attributes are likely to be framed as complements or substitutes. These
concepts are known primarily in the context of combinatorial preferences, that is, preferences
over combinations of distinct items. In the multiattribute framework, two attributes are
complements if an improvement in the value of both is worth more than the sum of the
same improvement in each separately. Two attributes are substitutes if it is the other way
around.
These concepts are meaningful only with respect to attributes that are FOPI,
otherwise the notion of improvement is conditional on the value of other attributes.
Deﬁnition 18 (Complements and Substitutes). Let u(·) be a measurable value func-
tion over S′. Let a, b ∈S′, and Z = S′ \ {a, b}, and assume that a and b are each FOPI
of the rest of the attributes. Attributes a and b are called complements if for any ai > aˆi
(ai, aˆi ∈D(a)) and any bj > bˆj (bj, bˆj ∈D(b)), and any Z′ ∈D(Z),
u(ai, bj, Z′) −u(aˆi, bˆj, Z′) > u(ai, bˆj, Z′) −u(aˆi, bˆj, Z′) + u(aˆi, bj, Z′) −u(aˆi, bˆj, Z′).
505

Engel & Wellman
Attributes a and b are substitutes if the inequality sign is (always) reversed.
This relationship between attributes is ruled out under an additive utility function, but
admitted under a weaker independence condition, called mutual utility independence (MUI)
(Keeney & Raiﬀa, 1976), which implies that the utility function can be either multiplicative
or additive.
If it is multiplicative, the utility function can be represented by n single-
dimensional functions, n scaling constants, and a single parameter k (the MUI-factor) that
controls the strength of complementarity (k > 0) or substitutivity (k < 0) between all
pairs of attributes within a GAI element (for k = 0 the set of attributes is additive).7 For
experimental purposes, we assume that each attribute cluster (GAI element) exhibits MUI,
and that the value of k is the same for all.
In an elicitation procedure, one would normally extract the MUI scaling constants from
a user, and then compute k (Keeney & Raiﬀa, 1976). For our purposes, we ﬁrst determine
k according to the relationship we wish to impose on the attributes, and then draw MUI
scaling constants that are consistent with this value.
More explicitly, we draw random
scaling constants, and then iteratively modify all the constants, until a set of constants is
found that is consistent with k. The next step is to compute ¯ur(Ir) according to the MUI
formula (Keeney & Raiﬀa, 1976). The ¯ur(Ir) (for all r) are in the range [0, 1], hence at
this point we can proceed with steps 2 and 3 above. Note that in this procedure several
distinct sets of scaling constants are used: the g constants used in step 3 scale the diﬀerent
GAI elements, whereas the MUI constants, per GAI element, scale the attributes within
the element.
7.3 Additive Approximation
Another issue for experiment design is how the additive auction (AP) behaves in the face
of non-additive buyer preferences, speciﬁcally how would it select the approximately buyer-
preferred sets of conﬁgurations.
The approach we took is to come up with an additive
function that approximates the buyer’s true utility function, and use it throughout the
auction. We are not aware of a better strategy, but do not rule out the possibility that one
exists.
A natural approach to generate a linear approximation %
i ˆfi(·) for an arbitrary function
ub(·) is to use linear regression. We deﬁne an indicator variable xij for every aij ∈D(ai),
and consider any value of an assignment as a data point. For example, the assignment
a1j(1), . . . , amj(m) creates the following data point:
m
"
i=1
"
aij ∈D(ai)
cijxij = u(a1j(1), . . . , amj(m)),
in which the value of the variable xij is 1 if j = j(i) and 0 otherwise. The coeﬃcients cij
result from the regression and represent the values to be used as ˆfi(aij).
When the problem includes many attributes, it is not possible to consider all the points
in Θ. Under the assumption that a compact GAI representation exists, it is sensible to
expect that we could use fewer data points for the regression. We indeed found that a small
7. We formalize this notion in Appendix D.
506

GAI Auctions
random sample from the joint utility yields an approximation as eﬀective as one based on all
the points. More precisely, for the largest domain we tested (25 attributes, each with domain
of size 4) we found that the eﬃciency of AP does not improve when increasing the number
of sampled points beyond 200. We show a chart supporting this claim in Appendix E. Our
experiments use 300 points for all instances.
This method of comparison probably overestimates the quality of an additive approxi-
mation. In general, we would not have the true utility function explicitly when we generate
the approximation.
Extraction or elicitation of the utility function is usually the most
serious bottleneck of a multiattribute mechanism. Therefore, the major reason to use an
additive approximation is to reduce the burden of elicitation. Hence in practice we would
try to obtain the additive function directly, rather than obtain the full utility and then ap-
proximate it. The result of such process is somewhat unpredictable, because the elicitation
queries may not be coherent: if willingness to pay for a1 depends on the value of b, then
what is the willingness to pay for a1 when we do not know b? We therefore consider our
experimental generation method biased in favor of the additive approximation.
8. Simulation Results
We provide detailed results of our simulation study. Section 8.1 provides and analyses eco-
nomic eﬃciency results. Section 8.2 covers the computational study, and results regarding
revelation of private information are provided in Section 8.3.
8.1 Eﬃciency and GAI Structure
We measure eﬃciency in terms of percentage of the MAP solution, which is the surplus
achieved by the optimal seller-conﬁguration pair. To evaluate the eﬀect of preference mod-
eling on eﬃciency, we vary structural parameters of the buyer’s GAI preferences: the con-
nectivity factor e, and the size ξ of the largest GAI element.
Performance depends on
many additional factors, such as the size of attribute domains, number of sellers, amount of
price decrement (ϵ), and the distribution from which utility functions are drawn. To isolate
the primary structural parameters, we ﬁrst tested how eﬃciency varies according to the
choices of these side factors, for several ﬁxed GAI structures with fully random subutility
functions. As a result of these tests, we picked the following parameter values for the rest
of the simulations: all valuations are drawn from a uniform distribution, with buyer mean
set at 500. A mean for each seller is drawn uniformly from [500, 700]. The variance is set
at 200 for all traders. We use the same domain size of 3 or 4 for all attributes, and number
of sellers m = 5. Further explanation of the process leading to these choices is provided in
the full report (Engel, 2008).
In the following experiment we used a roughly ﬁxed GAI structure, with g = 6 elements
and e = 5, (that is, the GAI structure is a tree, not a forest), and ϵ = 24 (meaning reduction
of δ = 4 per sub-conﬁguration). We vary the number of attributes by varying the size of each
element. Figure 2a shows the eﬃciency obtained with respect to ξ, the size of the largest
GAI element. As expected, the size of the GAI elements has negligible, or no eﬀect on the
eﬃciency of GAI auctions. It has a dramatic eﬀect on the eﬃciency of AP. When ξ = 1,
the decomposition is in fact additive and hence AP performs optimally. The performance
then deteriorates as ξ increases.
507

Engel & Wellman
(a)
(b)
Figure 2: Eﬃciency as a function of: (a) the size of largest GAI element (ξ), given e = 5,
(b) the number of GAI elements (e + 1), given ξ = 5.
We performed the same test when using utility in which all attributes are FOPI. With
the FOPI restriction, the additive approximation is much more eﬃcient relative to uncon-
strained random utility. When FOPI applies to a strict subset of the attributes, we would
expect the eﬃciency of AP to fall somewhere between its eﬃciency under FOPI and the
unrestricted case. Somewhat surprisingly, imposing FOPI renders the GAI auctions slightly
less eﬃcient. Nevertheless, the additive approximation achieves lower eﬃciency compared
to the accurate preference modeling, with diﬀerences that pass the statistical signiﬁcance
test (P < 0.01), for ξ ≥3. Further, note that the performance of GAI auctions can always
be improved using a smaller value of ϵ and δ = ϵ
g, whereas this hardly improves performance
of AP. With δ = 2, a statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence (with the same conﬁdence level) is
already detected for ξ ≥2. We used δ = 2 hereafter.
The next experiment (Figure 2b) measures eﬃciency as a function of e, for a given ﬁxed
ξ. We assume connected GAI trees, so e is the number of GAI elements minus one. We
tested structures with e varying from 1 to 10, all elements of size 3 to 5, and ξ = 5 for
all the structures.8
On a single element, the GAI auction is similar to NLD (Parkes &
Kalagnanam, 2005), which is an auction that assigns a price to every point in the joint
domain. Here e = 0, hence the eﬃciency of GAI is close to perfect. This structure is on the
other extreme compared to an additive representation, and indeed the performance of AP
is particularly inferior (only 70% eﬃcient).
With more GAI elements, the eﬃciency of GAI auctions declines at a very slow pace. The
theoretical potential error (e + 2)ϵ, is mostly a result of eﬃciency loss of ηi for the winning
seller, based on Lemma 5. Such eﬃciency loss may occur only if each sub-conﬁguration
in ηi belongs to a conﬁguration that yields the lowest proﬁt allowed in the buyer-preferred
set—a particularly rare case. In practice, the loss is closer to eδ, which is a much smaller
error.
The performance of AP improves as the number of elements grows while their maximal
and average sizes are ﬁxed. Intuitively, changing the structure that way takes it closer to
8. We did not ﬁnd the particular tree structure to be inﬂuential on the results; the ﬁnal structure used in
the reported results has a maximum of three children per node.
508

GAI Auctions
(a)
(b)
Figure 3: (a) Eﬃciency as a function of k ≥0 (complements). (b) Eﬃciency as a function
of k ≤0 (substitutes).
an additive representation. Under FOPI, we see a similar phenomenon as before. However,
the diﬀerence between GAI FOPI and AP FOPI, even for ten elements, is substantial and
statistically signiﬁcant.
Figures 3a and 3b present eﬃciency as a function of the MUI-factor k, for complements
and substitutes, respectively. We used a ﬁxed GAI structure with four elements, the largest
of which has four attributes, and imposed the same k on all elements. As expected, the
stronger the complementarity among the attributes, the lower the eﬃciency of AP, whereas
this relationship does not aﬀect the eﬃciency of GAI auctions. For the case of substitutes,
in contrast, the additive approximation performs well, as eﬃciency starts to deteriorate only
for extreme values of k. Very roughly, we can say that when relationship among attributes
(within each GAI element) is limited to (mild) substitutions, it could be a good idea to
use an additive approximation. Unfortunately, our interpretation of the parameter k lacks
quantitative scaling: there is no clear intuition of what the actual numbers mean, beyond
the qualitative classiﬁcation mentioned above.
To summarize this part, the experimental results show that GAI auctions yield signiﬁ-
cant eﬃciency improvement in comparison to an additive auction, on almost all classes of
evaluations. Though the eﬃciency of an additive auction may come across as relatively
high and perhaps suﬃcient, such an observation is misleading in several respects. (i) In
large procurement events, 5–10% eﬃciency diﬀerences translate to large amounts of money.
(ii) The wider eﬃciency loss of an additive auction (with no theoretical bound) may have
an impact on incentives; SB may no longer be an approximate ex-post Nash equilibrium.
(iii) Eﬃciency is expected to deteriorate for larger problems with larger GAI elements, and
in particular if FOPI does not hold for many of the attributes.
(iv) As argued in Sec-
tion 7.3, we expect practical additive auctions to perform worse than AP with our tailored
approximation.
8.2 Computational Analysis
The computational tasks required by auction simulations were performed using the algo-
rithms described in Appendix C. These algorithms have been suggested and applied for
509

Engel & Wellman
(a)
(b)
Figure 4: Number of rounds as a function of: (a) the size of largest GAI element (ξ), given
e = 5, (b) the number of GAI elements (e + 1), given ξ = 5 and δ = 2.
combinatorial optimization problems before (Dechter, 1997; Nilsson, 1998), therefore the
computational runtime to process a round is not of particular interest to this work. Instead,
we focus on the number of rounds the auction requires. We tested the number of rounds
required by auctions GAI and AP, under fully random and FOPI preferences, varying three
of the parameters: ξ (size of largest GAI element), e (connectivity), and δ.
The complexity in terms of number of rounds is shown in Figure 4a (with respect to ξ)
and Figure 4b (with respect to the number of elements). We observe that under FOPI the
GAI auction takes much longer to converge, compared to the case of random preferences.
The reason is that under FOPI, the sellers’ and the buyer’s preferences can in general be seen
as opposites: at the same price, and for a speciﬁc attribute, the buyer prefers higher quality,
whereas the sellers prefer lower quality (given ﬁxed values for the rest of the attributes),
and everyone agrees on the relative quality of attribute values. The apparent diﬀerence in
the growth rate (the FOPI case seems to have a steeper curve) is somewhat misleading: for
ξ = 8 (not shown) GAI under random preferences is already caught up with the same curve
we see for the FOPI case. The number of rounds, as expected, grows exponentially with
the size of the largest element. However, as observed from Figure 4b, this number does not
grow quickly as a function of the number of elements, supporting the theoretical arguments
of Section 6.2. Note also that the variance chosen for traders’ preferences is ﬁxed, thus for
a small number of elements the variance over them is wider, resulting in the large number
of rounds required by GAI FOPI in that case.
For AP, the only implication of increasing ξ is the respective increase in the number
of attributes. As a result, the complexity of AP (not shown) grows very slowly with the
increase in ξ. For the FOPI case, with δ = 2, AP takes an average of 481 rounds for ξ = 1
(6 attributes) and 546 rounds for ξ = 6 (19 attributes). The numbers are slightly higher for
random preferences (523 to 628).
For high-dimensional multiattribute auctions, we expect that participation would typi-
cally be automated through software bidding agents (Wellman, Greenwald, & Stone, 2007).
Under these circumstances, an auction taking up to thousands of rounds should not cause
a concern. However, if for some reason rounds are expensive, we might reconsider adopt-
510

GAI Auctions
Figure 5: Eﬃciency as a function of the number of rounds.
ing additive auctions, and sacriﬁce eﬃciency in order to decrease the number of rounds.
Alternatively, we could keep using GAI auctions and increase ϵ (and with it δ). The ﬁnal
experiment compares these two alternatives. We vary the level of ϵ, in order to view eﬃ-
ciency as a function of the number of rounds (Figure 5). The GAI structure used for this
experiment has e = 5 and ξ = 5.
As evident from the chart, in most cases GAI achieves better eﬃciency even for a ﬁxed
number of rounds. The only exception is when the budget of rounds is very small (under
200), and FOPI holds. In such case we need to pay with more rounds in order to get the
higher eﬃciency.
The total computation time, carried out by a GAI auction with 10 elements, ξ = 5,
d = 3, δ = 2, and the rest of the parameters ﬁxed as above, is around 11 seconds on
average, using an Intel Dual Core (2.00 Ghz) CPU, with 2048 MB RAM.
8.3 Information Revelation
A key diﬀerence between the mechanism proposed here and most previous literature is in
the extent to which the buyer is required to reveal preference information. In GAI auctions,
the buyer does not need to reveal all of its private preference information up front. Of
course, the price changes do reveal some of the buyer’s information. Another experimental
question is therefore whether this mechanism signiﬁcantly reduces the overall amount of
information revealed by the buyer.
PK study information revelation by both the buyer and the seller, under an additivity
assumption. When the utility function is additive the amount of information revealed can
be measured in terms of constraints on the linear weights. Sellers can infer bounds on the
buyer’s set of weights, and the amount of information hidden from them is represented by
the fraction of the simplex that satisﬁes those constraints. This simplex analysis is not
possible for GAI utilities. We suggest an alternative geared towards the kind of information
revealed by the GAI auctions.
In GAI auctions, the buyer’s private information is partially revealed through the selec-
tion of the buyer’s preferred set Mt. The auction does not need to announce this directly;
in general the sellers can infer that a sub-conﬁguration is in Mt only if it received a bid
(usually sellers will observe this only for their own bids), yet its price does not change in the
511

Engel & Wellman
next round. We therefore measure exactly that—for how many sub-conﬁgurations θr there
was at least one round t such that θr ∈Mt∩Bt
i for some i. More speciﬁcally, we deﬁne such
a sub-conﬁguration as revealed, and within each GAI element we measure the fraction of
sub-conﬁgurations that are revealed by the end of the auction. This measurement overesti-
mates the information that is actually revealed, as sellers can infer some bounds on relative
preferences but not the precise values of the functions fb(·). Moreover, it assumes that each
seller observes all bids (meaning that sellers share bid information with each other), an
unrealistic event in practice.
Based on this criterion, GAI auctions reveal on average 15%–25% of the buyer’s pref-
erences when preferences exhibit FOPI, and 10%–15% when the subutilities are completely
random. It does not seem to systematically depend on any other parameter we tested. This
validates our claim as to the advantage that GAI auctions promise over second-score types
of auctions.
9. Conclusions
We propose a novel exploitation of preference structure in multiattribute auctions. Rather
than assuming full additivity, or no structure at all, we model preferences using the gen-
eralized additive independence (GAI) decomposition. We show how a GAI representation
can be constructed from relatively simple statements of willingness-to-pay, and develop an
iterative auction mechanism directly relying on the decomposition. Our auction mechanism
generalizes the preference modeling employed by Parkes and Kalagnanam (2005), while in
essence retaining their information revelation properties. It allows for a range of tradeoﬀs
between the accuracy of preference representation and computational complexity of the
auction, as well as the tradeoﬀbetween buyer information revelation and the number of
rounds required for convergence.
We performed a simulation study of our proposed multiattribute auctions, compared
to a mechanism that assumes additive preferences.
The study validated the usefulness
of GAI auctions when preferences are non-additive but GAI, and allowed us to quantify
the advantages for speciﬁc classes of preferences.
In general, we found that our design
yields signiﬁcantly higher economic eﬃciency in comparison to additive auctions. When
the GAI subutilities exhibit internal structures, such as FOPI, the eﬃciency loss of additive
approximation is less severe, but in most cases the beneﬁt of an accurate GAI model is still
signiﬁcant. Using an additive approximation may be a reasonable approach when the GAI
structure is fairly similar to an additive one, or when the auction must terminate within a
small number of rounds.
The tradeoﬀbetween expressive and compactness of preference representation is ubiq-
uitous in applications involving preferences. On one hand, we would like to ask users for as
little as possible information; on the other, users’ preference statements may not be accu-
rate or even meaningful if they cannot express important dependencies. In such problems
it could be useful to experimentally compare the accuracy of GAI and additive representa-
tions. The experimental methodologies used in this study, in particular the generation of
random structured utility functions, and ﬁnding an additive approximation to GAI func-
tions, may therefore prove applicable to a broader class of preference research problems in
which this tradeoﬀexists.
512

GAI Auctions
