Machine Learning for Electronic Design Automation: A
Survey
GUYUE HUANG∗, JINGBO HU∗, YIFAN HE∗, JIALONG LIU∗, MINGYUAN MA∗, ZHAOYANG
SHEN∗, JUEJIAN WU∗, YUANFAN XU∗, HENGRUI ZHANG∗, KAI ZHONG∗, and XUE-
FEI NING, Tsinghua University, China
YUZHE MA, HAOYU YANG, and BEI YU, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR
HUAZHONG YANG and YU WANG, Tsinghua University, China
With the down-scaling of CMOS technology, the design complexity of very large-scale integrated (VLSI) is
increasing. Although the application of machine learning (ML) techniques in electronic design automation
(EDA) can trace its history back to the 90s, the recent breakthrough of ML and the increasing complexity of
EDA tasks have aroused more interests in incorporating ML to solve EDA tasks. In this paper, we present a
comprehensive review of existing ML for EDA studies, organized following the EDA hierarchy.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: electronic design automation, machine learning, neural networks
ACM Reference Format:
Guyue Huang, Jingbo Hu, Yifan He, Jialong Liu, Mingyuan Ma, Zhaoyang Shen, Juejian Wu, Yuanfan Xu,
Hengrui Zhang, Kai Zhong, Xuefei Ning, Yuzhe Ma, Haoyu Yang, Bei Yu, Huazhong Yang, and Yu Wang. 2021.
Machine Learning for Electronic Design Automation: A Survey. 1, 1 (March 2021), 44 pages.
1
INTRODUCTION
As one of the most important fields in applied computer/electronic engineering, Electronic De-
sign Automation (EDA) has a long history and is still under heavy development incorporating
cutting-edge algorithms and technologies. In recent years, with the development of semiconductor
technology, the scale of integrated circuit (IC) has grown exponentially, challenging the scalability
and reliability of the circuit design flow. Therefore, EDA algorithms and software are required to
be more effective and efficient to deal with extremely large search space with low latency.
Machine learning (ML) is taking an important role in our lives these days, which has been
widely used in many scenarios. ML methods, including traditional and deep learning algorithms,
achieve amazing performance in solving classification, detection, and design space exploration
problems. Additionally, ML methods show great potential to generate high-quality solutions for
many NP-complete (NPC) problems, which are common in the EDA field, while traditional methods
lead to huge time and resource consumption to solve these problems. Traditional methods usually
solve every problem from the beginning, with a lack of knowledge accumulation. Instead, ML
algorithms focus on extracting high-level features or patterns that can be reused in other related or
similar situations, avoiding repeated complicated analysis. Therefore, applying machine learning
methods is a promising direction to accelerate the solving of EDA problems.
∗These authors are ordered alphabetically.
Authors’ addresses: Guyue Huang; Jingbo Hu; Yifan He; Jialong Liu; Mingyuan Ma; Zhaoyang Shen; Juejian Wu; Yuanfan Xu;

tsinghua.edu.cn, Tsinghua University, China.
© 2021
arXiv:2102.03357v2  [eess.SP]  8 Mar 2021

2
G. Huang et al.
In recent years, ML for EDA is becoming one of the trending topics, and a lot of studies that use
ML to improve EDA methods have been proposed, which cover almost all the stages in the chip
design flow, including design space reduction and exploration, logic synthesis, placement, routing,
testing, verification, manufacturing, etc. These ML-based methods have demonstrated impressive
improvement compared with traditional methods.
We observe that most work collected in this survey can be grouped into four types: decision
making in traditional methods, performance prediction, black-box optimization, and automated de-
sign, ordered by decreasing manual efforts and expert experiences in the design procedure, or an
increasing degree of automation. The opportunity of ML in EDA starts from decision making in
traditional methods, where an ML model is trained to select among available tool chains, algo-
rithms, or hyper-parameters, to replace empirical choice or brute-force search. ML is also used
for performance prediction, where a model is trained from a database of previously implemented
designs to predict the quality of new designs, helping engineers to evaluate new designs without
the time-consuming synthesis procedure. Even more automated, EDA tools utilized the workflow of
black-box optimization, where the entire procedure of design space exploration (DSE) is guided by a
predictive ML model and a sampling strategy supported by ML theories. Recent advances in Deep
Learning (DL), especially Reinforcement Learning (RL) techniques have stimulated several studies
that fully automate some complex design tasks with extremely large design space, where predictors
and policies are learned, performed, and adjusted in an online form, showing a promising future of
Artificial Intelligence (AI)-assisted automated design.
This survey gives a comprehensive review of some recent important studies applying ML to
solve some EDA important problems. The review of these studies is organized according to their
corresponding stages in the EDA flow. Although the study on ML for EDA can trace back to the
last century, most of the works included in this survey are in recent five years. The rest of this
survey is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the background of both EDA and ML.
From Section 3 to Section 5, we introduce the studies that focus on different stages of the EDA
flow, i.e., high-level synthesis, logic synthesis & physical design (placement and routing), and mask
synthesis, respectively. In Section 6, analog design methods with ML are reviewed. ML-powered
testing and verification methods are discussed in Section 7. Then, in Section 8, other highly-related
studies are discussed, including ML for SAT solver and the acceleration of EDA with deep learning
engine. The discussion of various studies from the ML perspective is given in Section 9, which is
complementary to the main organization of this paper. Finally, Section 10 concludes the existing
ML methods for EDA and highlights future trends in this field.
2
BACKGROUND
2.1
Electronic Design Automation
Electronic design automation is one of the most important fields in electronic engineering. In
the past few decades, it has been witnessed that the flow of chip design became more and more
standardized and complicated. A modern chip design flow is shown in Figure 1.
High-level synthesis (HLS) provides automatic conversion from C/C++/SystemC-based specifica-
tions to hardware description languages (HDL). HLS makes hardware design much more convenient
by allowing the designer to use high-level descriptions for a hardware system. However, when
facing a large-scale system, HLS often takes a long time to finish the synthesis. Consequently,
efficient design space exploration (DSE) strategy is crucial in HLS [74, 95, 107, 112, 180].
Logic synthesis converts the behavioral level description to the gate level description, which is
one of the most important problems in EDA. Logic synthesis implements the specific logic functions
by generating a combination of gates selected in a given cell library, and optimizes the design for

Machine Learning for Electronic Design Automation: A Survey
3
System Speciﬁcation
Architectural Design
Functional Design and 
Logic Design (RTL)
Logic Synthesis
Physical Design
Physical Veriﬁcation and 
Signoff
Fabrication
Packaging and Testing
Chip
module test
input in[3];
…
endmodule
AND
OR
DRC
LVS
STA
Fig. 1. Modern chip design flow.
different optimization goals. Logic synthesis is a complicated process that usually cannot be solved
optimally, and hence the heuristic algorithms are widely used in this stage, which include lots of
ML methods [48, 56, 115, 167].
Based on the netlist obtained from synthesis, floorplanning and placement aim to assign the
netlist components to specific locations on the chip layout. Better placement assignment implies
the potential of better chip area utilization, timing performance, and routability. Routing is one of
the essential steps in very large-scale integrated (VLSI) physical design flow based on the placement
assignment. Routing assigns the wires to connect the components on the chip. At the same time,
routing needs to satisfy the requirements of timing performance and total wirelength without
violating the design rules. The placement and routing are strongly coupled. Thus it is crucial to
consider the routing performance even in the placement stage, and many ML-based routing-aware
methods are proposed to improve the performance of physical design [6, 27, 89, 106, 150, 154].
Fabrication is a complicated process containing multiple steps, which has a high cost in terms of
time and resources. Mask synthesis is one of the main steps in the fabrication process, where lithog-
raphy simulation is leveraged to reduce the probability of fabrication failure. Mask optimization
and lithography simulation are still challenging problems. Recently, various ML-based methods are
applied in the lithography simulation and mask synthesis [20, 43, 159, 163, 165].
To ensure the correctness of a design, we need to perform design verification before manufactur-
ing. In general, verification is conducted after each stage of the EDA flow, and the test set design is
one of the major problems. Traditional random or automated test set generation methods are far
away from optimal, therefore, there exist many studies that apply ML methods to optimize test set
generation for verification [24, 33, 38, 47, 49, 57, 69, 135, 145, 146].

4
G. Huang et al.
After the chip design flow is finished, manufacturing testing needs to be carried out. The chips
need to go through various tests to verify their functionality and reliability. The coverage and
the efficiency are two main optimization goals of the testing stage. Generally speaking, a large
test set (i.e., a large number of test points) leads to higher coverage at the cost of high resource
consumption. To address the high cost of the testing process, studies have focused on applying ML
techniques for test set optimization [100, 120, 140, 141] and test complexity reduction [5, 34, 142].
Thanks to decades of efforts from both academia and industry, the chip design flow is well-
developed. However, with the huge increase in the scale of integrated circuits, more efficient and
effective methods need to be incorporated to reduce the design cost. Recent advancements in
machine learning have provided a far-reaching data-driven perspective for problem-solving. In
this survey, we review recent learning-based approaches for each stage in the EDA flow and also
discuss the ML for EDA studies from the machine learning perspective.
2.2
Machine Learning
Machine learning is a class of algorithms that automatically extract information from datasets
or prior knowledge. Such a data-driven approach is a supplement to analytical models that are
widely used in the EDA domain. In general, ML-based solutions can be categorized according
to their learning paradigms: supervised learning, unsupervised learning, active learning,
and reinforcement learning. The difference between supervised and unsupervised learning is
whether or not the input data is labeled. With supervised or unsupervised learning, ML models are
trained on static data sets offline and then deployed for online inputs without refinement. With
active learning, ML models subjectively choose samples from input space to obtain ground truth
and refine themselves during the searching process. With reinforcement learning, ML models
interact with the environment by taking actions and getting rewards, with the goal of maximizing
the total reward. These paradigms all have been shown to be applied to the EDA problems.
As for the model construction, conventional machine learning models have been extensively
studied for the EDA problems, especially for physical design [66, 178]. Linear regression, random
forest (RF) [91] and artificial neural networks (ANN) [55] are classical regression models. Support
vector machine (SVM) [12] is a powerful classification algorithm especially suitable for tasks with a
small size of training set. Other common classification models include K-Nearest-Neighbor (KNN)
algorithm [39] and RF. These models can be combined with ensemble or boosting techniques
to build more expressive models. For example, XGBoost [23] is a gradient boosting framework
frequently used in the EDA problems.
Thanks to large public datasets, algorithm breakthrough, and improvements in computation
platforms, there have been efforts of applying deep learning (DL) for EDA. In particular, popular
models in recent EDA studies include convolutional neural network (CNN) [37, 111], recurrent
neural networks (RNN) [83, 148], generative adversarial network (GAN) [165], deep reinforcement
learning (DRL) [113, 147] and graph neural networks (GNN) [147, 168]. CNN models are composed
of convolutional layers and other basic blocks such as non-linear activation functions and down-
sample pooling functions. While CNN is suitable for feature extraction on grid structure data like
2-D image, RNN is good at processing sequential data such as text or audio. GNN is proposed for
data organized as graphs. GAN trains jointly a generative network and a discriminative network
which compete against each other to eventually generate high quality fake samples. DRL is a class
of algorithms that incorporated deep learning into the reinforcement learning paradigm, where
an agent learns a strategy from the rewards acquired with previous actions to determine the next
action. DRL has achieved great success in complicated tasks with large decision space (e.g., Go
game [138]).

Machine Learning for Electronic Design Automation: A Survey
5
3
HIGH LEVEL SYNTHESIS
High-level synthesis (HLS) tools provide automatic conversion from C/C++/SystemC-based specifi-
cation to hardware description languages like Verilog or VHDL. HLS tools developed in industry
and academia [1, 2, 15] have greatly improved productivity in customized hardware design. High-
quality HLS designs require appropriate pragmas in the high-level source code related to parallelism,
scheduling and resource usage, and careful choices of synthesis configurations in post-Register-
Transfer-Level (RTL) stage. Tuning these pragmas and configurations is a non-trivial task, and the
long synthesis time for each design (hours from the source code to the final bitstream) prohibits
exhaustive DSE.
ML techniques have been applied to improve HLS tools from the following three aspects: fast and
accurate result estimation [30, 37, 108, 109, 143, 164, 172], refining conventional DSE algorithms [74,
107, 149], and reforming DSE as an active-learning problem [94, 95, 112, 180]. In addition to achieving
good results on individual problems, previous studies have also introduced new generalizable
techniques about feature engineering [30, 108, 109, 164, 172], selection and customization of ML
models [143], and design space sampling and searching strategies [95, 112, 180].
This section is organized as follows. Section 3.1 introduces recent studies on employing ML for
result estimation, often in a static way. Section 3.2 introduces recent studies on adopting ML in
DSE workflow, either to improve conventional methods or in the form of active learning.
3.1
Machine Learning for Result Estimation
The reports from HLS tools provide important guidance for tuning the high-level directives. How-
ever, acquiring accurate result estimation in an early stage is difficult due to complex optimizations
in the physical synthesis, imposing a trade-off between accuracy (waiting for post-synthesis results)
and efficiency (evaluating in the HLS stage). ML can be used to improve the accuracy of HLS reports
through learning from real design benchmarks. In Section 3.1.1, we introduce previous work on
predicting the timing, resource usage, and operation delay of an HLS design. In Section 3.1.2 we
describe two types of research about cross-platform performance prediction.
3.1.1
Estimation of Timing, Resource Usage, and Operation Delay. The overall workflow of timing
and resource usage prediction is concluded in Figure 2. This workflow is first proposed by Dai et al.
[30] and augmented by Makrani et al. [108] and Ferianc et al. [37]. The main methodology is to
train an ML model that takes HLS reports as input and outputs a more accurate implementation
report without conducting the time-consuming post-implementation. The workflow proposed by
Dai et al. [30] can be divided into two steps: data processing and training estimation models.
Step 1: Data Processing. To enable ML for HLS estimation, we need a dataset for training
and testing. The HLS and implementation reports are usually collected across individual designs
by running each design through the complete C-to-bitstream flow, for various clock periods and
targeting different FPGA devices. After that, one can extract features from the HLS reports as inputs
and features from implementation reports as outputs. Besides, to overcome the effect of colinearity
and reduce the dimension of the data, previous studies often apply feature selection techniques to
systematically remove unimportant features. The most commonly used features are summarized in
Table 1.
Step 2: Training Estimation Models. After constructing the dataset, regression models are
trained to estimate post-implementation resource usages and clock periods. Frequently used metrics
to report the estimation error include relative absolute error (RAE) and relative root mean squared
error (RMSE). For both metrics, lower is better. RAE is defined in Equation (1), where ˆ𝑦is a vector
of values predicted by the model, 𝑦is a vector of actual ground truth values in the testing set, and

6
G. Huang et al.
C/C++/SystemC
HDL
HLS
Implementation
Bitstream
HLS Report
(Estimated timing, 
resource usage, 
HDL details, etc)
Implementation 
Report (Actual
timing, resource 
usage, etc)
ML Predictor
Time-consuming
Inaccurate
Fast and accurate
Fig. 2. FPGA tool flow with HLS, highlighting ML-based result predictor (reproduced from [30]).
Table 1. Categories of selected features and descriptions [30, 108]
Category
Brief Description
Clock periods
Target clock period; achieved clock period & its uncertainty.
Resources
Utilization and availability of LUT, FF, DSP, and BRAM.
Logic Ops
Bitwidth/resource statistics of operations.
Arithmetic Ops
Bitwidth/resource statistics of arithmetic operations.
Memory
Number of memory words/banks/bits; resource usage for memory.
Multiplexer
Resource usage for multiplexers; multiplexer input size/bitwidth.
¯𝑦denotes the mean value of 𝑦.
RAE = |ˆ𝑦−𝑦|
|𝑦−𝑦| .
(1)
Relative RMSE is given by Equation (2), where 𝑁is the number of samples, and ˆ𝑦𝑖and 𝑦𝑖are the
predicted and actual values of a sample, respectively.
Relative RMSE =
v
u
t
1
𝑁
𝑁
∑︁
𝑖=1
( ˆ𝑦𝑖−𝑦𝑖
𝑦𝑖
)2 × 100%.
(2)
Makrani et al. [108] model timing as a regression problem, and use the Minerva tool [36] to obtain
results in terms of maximum clock frequency, throughput, and throughput-to-area ratio for the
RTL code generated by the HLS tool. Then an ensemble model combining linear regression, neural
network, SVM, and random forest, is proposed to conduct estimation and achieve an accuracy
higher than 95%. There are also studies that predict whether a post-implementation is required or
not, instead of predicting the implementation results. As a representative study, Liu and Schäfer
[94] train a predictive model to avoid re-synthesizing each new configuration.
ML techniques have been applied recently to reduce the HLS tool’s prediction error of the
operation delay [143]. Existing HLS tools perform delay estimations based on the simple addi-
tion of pre-characterized delays of individual operations, and can be inaccurate because of the
post-implementation optimizations (e.g., mapping to hardened blocks like DSP adder cluster). A
customized Graph Neural Network (GNN) model is built to capture the association between opera-
tions from the dataflow graph, and train this model to infer the mapping choices about hardened
blocks. Their method can reduce the RMSE of the operation delay prediction of Vivado HLS by 72%.

Machine Learning for Electronic Design Automation: A Survey
7
3.1.2
Cross-Platform Performance Prediction. Hardware/software co-design enables designers to
take advantage of new hybrid platforms such as Zynq. However, dividing an application into two
parts makes the platform selection difficult for the developers, since there is a huge variation
in the application’s performance of the same workload across various platforms. To avoid fully
implementing the design on each platform, Makrani et al. [109] propose an ML-based cross-platform
performance estimator, XPPE, and its overall workflow is described in Figure 3. The key functionality
of XPPE is using the resource utilization of an application on one specific FPGA to estimate its
performance on other FPGAs.
ML Predictor
Application
Target FPGA 
Specifications
Estimated 
Performance on 
target FPGA
HLS tool
HLS report 
(HDL details, 
resource 
usage, etc)
Application 
characteristics
Fig. 3. Overall workflow of XPPE (reproduced from [109]).
XPPE uses a Neural Network (NN) model to estimate the speedup of an application for a target
FPGA over the ARM processor. The inputs of XPPE are available resources on target FPGA, resource
utilization report from HLS Vivado tool (extracted features, similar to the features in Table 1), and
application’s characteristics. The output is the speedup estimation on the target FPGA over an ARM
A-9 processor. This method is similar to Dai et al. [30] and Makrani et al. [108] in that they all take
the features in HLS reports as input and aim to avoid the time-consuming post-implementation.
The main difference is that the input and output features in XPPE are from different platforms. The
relative RMSE between the predictions and the real measurements is used to evaluate the accuracy
of the estimator. The proposed architecture can achieve a relative mean square error of 5.1% and
the speedup is more than 0.98×.
Like XPPE, O’Neal et al. [116] also propose an ML-based cross-platform estimator, named
HLSPredict. There are two differences. First, HLSPredict only takes workloads (the applications
in XPPE) as inputs instead of the combination of HLS reports, application’s characteristics and
specification of target FPGA devices. Second, the target platform of HLSPredict must be the same
as the platform in the training stage. In general, HLSPredict aims to rapidly estimate performance
on a specific FPGA by direct execution of a workload on a commercially available off-the-shelf host
CPU, but XPPE aims to accurately predict the speedup of different target platforms. For optimized
workloads, HLSPredict achieves a relative absolute percentage error (𝐴𝑃𝐸= | 𝑦−^𝑦
𝑦|) of 9.08% and a
43.78× runtime speedup compared with FPGA synthesis and direct execution.
3.2
Machine Learning for Design Space Exploration in HLS
In the previous subsection, we describe how ML models are used to predict the quality of results.
Another application of ML in HLS is to assist DSE. The tunable synthesis options in HLS, provided
in the form of pragmas, span a very large design space. Most often, the task of DSE is to find the
Pareto Frontier Curve, on which every point is not fully dominated by any other points under all
the metrics.
Classical search algorithms have been applied in HLS DSE, such as Simulated Annealing (SA) and
Genetic Algorithm (GA). But these algorithms are unable to learn from the database of previously

8
G. Huang et al.
Initial Training
Initial Samples
ML Predictor
training
Active Learning
ML Predictor
Predicting results
for all design points
Refinement 
samples
training
Explorer /
Sampler
Fig. 4. The iterative-refinement DSE framework (reproduced from [95]).
explored designs. Many previous studies use an ML predictive model to guide the DSE. The models
are trained on the synthesis results of explored design points, and used to predict the quality of
new designs (See more discussions on this active learning workflow in Section 9.1). Typical studies
are elaborated in Section 3.2.1. There is also a thread of work that involves learning-based methods
to improve the inefficient or sensitive part of the classical search algorithms, as elaborated in
Section 3.2.2. Some work included in this subsection focuses on system-level DSE rather than HLS
design [74], or general active learning theories [180].
3.2.1
Active Learning. The four papers visited in this part utilize the active learning approach to
perform DSE for HLS, and use predictive ML models to surrogate actual synthesis when evaluating
a design. Liu and Schäfer [94] propose a design space explorer that selects new designs to implement
through an active learning approach. Transductive experimental design (TED) [95] focuses on
seeking the samples that describe the design space accurately. Pareto active learning (PAL) in [180]
is proposed to sample designs which the learner cannot clearly classify. Instead of focusing on
how accurately the model describes the design space, adaptive threshold non-pareto elimination
(ATNE) [112] estimates the inaccuracy of the learner and achieves better performance than TED
and PAL.
Liu and Schäfer [94] propose a dedicated explorer to search for Pareto-optimal HLS designs for
FPGAs. The explorer iteratively selects potential Pareto-optimal designs to synthesize and verify.
The selection is based on a set of important features, which are adjusted during the exploration. The
proposed method runs 6.5× faster than an exhaustive search, and runs 3.0× faster than a restricted
search method but finds results with higher quality.
The basic idea of TED [95] is to select representative as well as the hard-to-predict samples from
the design space, instead of the random sample used in previous work. The target is to maximize
the accuracy of the predictive model with the fewest training samples. The authors formulate the
problem of finding the best sampling strategy as follows: TED assumes that the overall number
of knob settings is 𝑛(|K| = 𝑛), from which we want to select a training set ˜
K such that | ˜
K| = 𝑚.
Minimizing the prediction error 𝐻(𝑘) −˜𝐻(𝑘) for all 𝑘∈K is equivalent to the following problem:
max
˜
K
𝑇[K ˜
K𝑇( ˜
K ˜
K𝑇+ 𝜇𝐼)−1 ˜
KK T] 𝑠.𝑡. ˜
K ⊂K, | ˜
K| = 𝑚,
where 𝑇[·] is the matrix trace operator and 𝜇> 0. The authors interpret their solution as sampling
from a set ˜
K that span a linear space, to retain most of the information of K [95].

Machine Learning for Electronic Design Automation: A Survey
9
SA/GA-Based 
Design Space 
Explorer 
Local Search
ML Predictor
Meta Search
New search trajectory to 
improve the predictor
Good starting states to find 
better designs
Fig. 5. Overview of the STAGE algorithm (reproduced from [74]).
PAL [180] is proposed for general active learning scenarios and is demonstrated by a sorting
network synthesis DSE problem in the paper. It uses Gaussian Process (GP) to predict Pareto-
optimal points in design space . The models predict the objective functions to identify points that
are Pareto-optimal with high probabilities. A point 𝑥that has not been sampled is predicted as
ˆ𝑓(𝑥) = 𝜇(𝑥) and 𝜎(𝑥) is interpreted as the uncertainty of the prediction which can be captured by
the hyperrectangle
𝑄𝜇,𝜎,𝛽(𝑥) =
n
𝑦: 𝜇(𝑥) −𝛽1/2𝜎(𝑥) ⪯𝑦⪯𝜇(𝑥) + 𝛽1/2𝜎(𝑥)
o
,
where 𝛽is a scaling parameter to be chosen. PAL focuses on accurately predicting points near the
Pareto frontier, instead of the whole design space. In every iteration, the algorithm classifies samples
into three groups: Pareto-optimal, Non-Pareto-optimal, and uncertain ones. The next design point
to evaluate is the one with the largest uncertainty, which intuitively has more information to
improve the model. The training process is terminated when there are no uncertain points. The
points classified as Pareto-optimal are then returned.
ATNE [112] utilizes Random Forest (RF) to aid the DSE process. This work uses a Pareto iden-
tification threshold that adapts to the estimated inaccuracy of the RF regressor and eliminates
the non-Pareto-optimal designs incrementally. Instead of focusing on improving the accuracy of
the learner, ATNE focuses on estimating and minimizing the risk of losing “good” designs due to
learning inaccuracy.
3.2.2
Machine Learning for Improving Other Optimization Algorithms. In this part, we summarize
three studies that use ML techniques to improve classical optimization algorithms.
STAGE [74] is proposed for DSE of many-core systems. The motivating observation of STAGE is
that the performance of simulated annealing is highly sensitive to the starting point of the search
process. The authors build an ML model to learn which parts of the design space should be focused
on, eliminating the times of futile exploration [13]. The proposed strategy is divided into two stages.
The first stage (local search) performs a normal local search, guided by a cost function based on the
designer’s goals. The second stage (meta search) tries to use the search trajectories from previous
local search runs to learn to predict the outcome of local search given a certain starting point [74].
Fast Simulated Annealing (FSA) [107] utilizes the decision tree to improve the performance of
SA. Decision tree learning is a widely used method for inductive inference. The HLS pragmas are
taken as input features. FSA first performs standard SA to generate enough training sets to build
the decision tree. Then it generates new design configurations with the decision tree and keeps the
dominating designs [107].
In a recent study, Wang and Schäfer [149] propose several ML techniques to help decide the
hyper-parameter settings of three meta-heuristic algorithms: SA, GA and Ant Colony Optimizations

10
G. Huang et al.
Table 2. Summary of ML for HLS
Task
Task Details
ML Algorithm
Reference
Result prediction
Timing and resource usage predic-
tion
Lasso, ANN, XGBoost
[30]
Max frequency, throughput, area
Ridge regression, ANN,
SVM, Random Forest
[108]
Latency
Gaussian Process
[37]
Operation delay
Graph Neural Network
[143]
Cross-platform
Predict for new FPGA platforms
ANN
[109]
Predict
for
new
applications
through executing on CPUs
Linear models, ANN, Ran-
dom Forest
[116]
Active learning
Reduce prediction error with fewer
samples
Random Forest, Gaussian
Process Regression
[95]
Reduce prediction error for points
near the Pareto-frontier
Gaussian Process
[180]
Reduce the risk of losing Pareto de-
signs
Random Forest
[112]
Improving conventional
algorithms
Initial point selection
Quadratic regression
[74]
Generation of new sample
Decision Tree
[107]
Hyper-parameter selection
Decision Tree
[149]
(ACO). For each algorithm, the authors build an ML model that predicts the resultant design quality
(measured by Average Distance to the Reference Set, ADRS) and runtime from hyper-parameter
settings. Compared with the default hyper-parameters, their models can improve the ADRS by
more than 1.92× within similar runtime. The authors also combine SA, GA and ACO to build a
new design space explorer, which further improves the search efficiency.
3.3
Summary of Machine Learning for HLS
This section reviews recent work on ML techniques in HLS, as listed in Table 2. Using ML-based
timing/resource/latency predictors and data-driven searching strategies, the engineering productiv-
ity of HLS tools can be further improved and higher-quality designs can be generated by efficiently
exploring a large design space.
We believe the following practice can help promote future research of ML in HLS:
• Public benchmark for DSE problems. The researches about result estimation are all evaluated
on public benchmarks of HLS applications, such as Rosetta [174], MachSuite [127], etc.
However, DSE researches are often evaluated on a few applications because the cost of
synthesizing a large design space for each application is heavy. Building a benchmark that
collects different implementations of each application can help fairly evaluate DSE algorithms.
• Customized ML models. Most of the previous studies use off-the-shelf ML models. Combining
universal ML algorithms with domain knowledge can potentially improve the performance
of the model. For example, Ustun et al. [143] customize a standard GNN model to handle the
specific delay prediction problem, which brings extra benefit in model accuracy.

Machine Learning for Electronic Design Automation: A Survey
11
4
LOGIC SYNTHESIS AND PHYSICAL DESIGN
In the logic synthesis and physical design stage, there are many key sub-problems that can benefit
from the power of ML models, including lithography hotspot detection, path classification, conges-
tion prediction, placement guide, fast timing analysis, logic synthesis scheduling, and so on. In this
section, we organize the review of studies by their targeting problems.
4.1
Logic Synthesis
Logic synthesis is an optimization problem with complicated constraints, which requires accurate
solutions. Consequently, using ML algorithms to directly generate logic synthesis solutions is
difficult. However, there are some studies using ML algorithms to schedule existing traditional opti-
mization strategies. For logic synthesis, LSOracle [115] relies on DNN to dynamically decide which
optimizer should be applied to different parts of the circuit. The framework exploits two optimizers,
and-inverter graph (AIG) and majority-inverter graph (MIG), and applies k-way partitioning on
circuit directed acyclic graph (DAG).
There are many logic transformations in current synthesis tools such as ABC [14]. To select an
appropriate synthesis flow, Yu et al. [167] formulate a multi-class classification problem and design
a CNN to map a synthesis flow to quality of results (QoR) levels. The prediction on unlabeled flows
are then used to select the optimal synthesis flow. The CNN takes the one-hot encoding of synthesis
flows as inputs and outputs the possibilities of the input flow belonging to different QoR metric
levels.
Reinforcement learning is also employed for logic synthesis in [48, 56]. A transformation between
two DAGs with the same I/O behaviors is modeled as an action. In [48], GCN is utilized as a policy
function to obtain the probabilities for every action. [56] employs advantage actor critic agent
(A2C) to search the optimal solution.
4.2
Placement and Routing Prediction
4.2.1
Traditional Placers Enhancement. While previous fast placers can conduct random logic
placement efficiently with good performances, researchers find that their placement of data path
logic is suboptimal. PADE [150] proposes a placement process with automatic data path extraction
and evaluation, in which the placement of data path logic is conducted separately from random
logic. PADE is a force-directed global placer, which applies SVM and NN to extract and evaluate
the data path patterns with high dimensional data such as netlist symmetrical structures, initial
placement hints, and relative area. The extracted data path is mapped to bit stack structure and
uses SAPT [151] (a placer placed on SimPL [73]) to optimize separately from random logic.
4.2.2
Routing Information Prediction. The basic requirements of routing design rules must be
considered in the placement stage. However, it is difficult to predict routing information in the
placement stage accurately and fast, and researchers recently employ machine learning to solve this.
RouteNet [154] is the first work to employ CNN for design rule checking (DRC) hotspot detection.
The input features of a customized fully convolutional network (FCN) include the outputs of
rectangular uniform wire density (RUDY), a pre-routing congestion estimator. An 18-layer ResNet
is also employed to predict design rule violation (DRV) count. A recent work [89] abstracts the pins
and macros density in placement results into image data, and utilizes a pixel-wise loss function to
optimize an encoder-decoder model (an extension of U-Net architecture). The network output is a
heat-map, which represents the location where detailed routing congestion may occur. PROS [21]
takes advantages of fully convolution networks to predict routing congestion from global placement
results. The framework is demonstrated efficient on industrial netlists. Pui et al. [124] explore the
possibilities using ML methods to predict routing congestion in UltraScale FPGAs. Alawieh et al.

12
G. Huang et al.
[6] transfer the routing congestion problem in large-scale FPGAs to an image-to-image problem,
and then uses conditional GAN to solve it. In addition, there are some studies that only predict
the number of congestions instead of the location of congestion [27, 106]. Maarouf et al. [106] use
models like linear regression, RF and MLP to learn how to use features from earlier stages to produce
more accurate congestion prediction, so that the placement strategy can be adjusted. Qi et al. [125]
predict the detailed routing congestion using nonparametric regression algorithm, multivariate
adaptive regression splines (MARS) with the global information as inputs. Another study [18]
takes the netlist, clock period, utilization, aspect ratio and BEOL stack as inputs and utilizes MARS
and SVM to predict the routability of a placement. This study also predicts Pareto frontiers of
utilization, number of metal layers, and aspect ratio. Study in [99] demonstrates the potential of
embedding ML-based routing congestion estimator into global placement stage. Recently, Liang
et al. [90] build a routing-free crosstalk prediction model by adopting several ML algorithms such
as regression, NN, GraphSAGE and GraphAttention. The proposed framework can identify nets
with large crosstalk noise before the routing step, which allows us to modify the placement results
to reduce crosstalk in advance.
There is also a need to estimate the final wirelength, timing performance, circuit area, power
consumption, clock and other parameters in the early stage. Such prediction task can be modeled as
a regression task and commonly-used ML models include SVM, Boosting, RF, MARS, etc. Jeong et al.
[63] learn a model with MARS to predict performance from a given set of circuit configurations,
with NoC router, a specific functional circuit and a specific business tool. In [60], the researchers
introduce linear discriminant analysis (LDA) algorithm to find seven combined features for the
best representation, and then a KNN-like approach is adopted to combine the prediction results of
ANN, SVM, LASSO, and other machine learning models. In this way, Hyun et al. [60] improve the
wirelength prediction given by the virtual placement and routing in the synthesis. Cheng et al. [27]
predict the final circuit performance in the macro placement stage, and Li and Franzon [82] predict
the circuit performance in the global routing stage, including congestion number, hold slack, area
and power.
For sign-off timing analysis, Barboza et al. [8] use random forest to give the sign-off timing
slack from hand-crafted features. Another research [67] works on sign-off timing analysis and
use linear regression to fit the static timing analysis (STA) model, thus reduce the frequency that
the incremental static timing analysis (iSTA) tool need to be called. Han et al. [52] propose SI for
Free, a regression method to predict expensive signal integrity (SI) mode sign-off timing results by
using cheap non-SI mode sign-off timing analysis. [68] propose golden timer extension (GTX), a
framework to reduce mismatches between different sign-off timing analysis tools to obtain neither
optimistic nor pessimistic results.
Lu et al. [102] employ GAN and RL for clock tree prediction. Flip flop distribution, clock net
distribution, and trial routing results serve as input images. For feature extraction, GAN-CTS
adopts transfer learning from a pre-trained ResNet-50 on the ImageNet dataset by adding fully-
connected (FC) layers. A conditional GAN is utilized to optimize the clock tree synthesis, of which
the generator is supervised by the regression model. An RL-based policy gradient algorithm is
leveraged for the clock tree synthesis optimization.
4.2.3
Placement Decision Making. As the preliminary step of the placement, floorplanning aims
to roughly determine the geometric relationship among circuit modules and to estimate the cost
of the design. He et al. [53] explore the possibility of acquiring local search heuristics through a
learning mechanism. More specifically, an agent has been trained using a novel deep Q-learning
algorithm to perform a walk in the search space by selecting a candidate neighbor solution at each
step, while avoiding introducing too much prior human knowledge during the search. Google [113]

Machine Learning for Electronic Design Automation: A Survey
13
recently models chip placement as a sequential decision making problem and trains an RL policy
to make placement decisions. During each episode, the RL agent lays the macro in order. After
arranging macros, it utilizes the force-directed method for standard cell placement. GCN is adopted
in this work to embed information related to macro features and the adjacency matrix of the netlist.
Besides, FC layers are used to embed metadata. After the embedding of the macros, the graph and
the metadata, another FC layer is applied for reward prediction. Such embedding is also fed into a
deconvolution CNN model, called PolicyNet, to output the mask representing the current macro
placement. The policy is optimized with RL to maximize the reward, which is the weighted average
of wirelength and congestion.
4.3
Power Deliver Network Synthesis and IR Drop Predictions
Power delivery network (PDN) design is a complex iterative optimization task, which strongly
influences the performance, area and cost of a chip. To reduce the design time, recent studies
have paid attention to ML-based IR drop estimation, a time-consuming sub-task. Previous work
usually adopts simulator-based IR analysis, which is challenged by the increasing complexity of
chip design. IR drop can be divided into two categories: static and dynamic. Static IR drop is mainly
caused by voltage deviation of the metal wires in the power grid, while dynamic IR drop is led by
the switching behaviors and localized fluctuating currents. In IncPIRD [54], the authors employ
XGBoost to conduct incremental prediction of static IR drop problem, which is to predict IR value
changes caused by the modification of the floorplan. For dynamic IR drop estimation, Xie et al.
[155] aim to predict the IR values of different locations and models IR drop estimation problem as a
regression task. This work introduces a “maximum CNN” algorithm to solve the problem. Besides,
PowerNet is designed to be transferable to new designs, while most previous studies train models
for specific designs. A recent work [173] proposes an electromigration-induced IR drop analysis
framework based on conditional GAN. The framework regards the time and selected electrical
features as input images and outputs the voltage map. Another recent work [28] focuses on PDN
synthesis in floorplan and placement stages. This paper designs a library of stitchable templates
to represent the power grid in different layers. In the training phase, SA is adopted to choose a
template. In the inference phase, MLP and CNN are used to choose the template for floorplan and
placement stages, respectively. Cao et al. [16] use hybrid surrogate modeling (HSM) that combines
SVM, ANN and MARS to predict the bump inductance that represents the quality of the power
delivery network.
4.4
Design Challenges for 3D Integration
3D integration is gaining more attention as a promising approach to further improve the integration
density. It has been widely applied in memory fabrication by stacking memory over logic.
Different from the 2D design, 3D integration introduces die-to-die variation, which does not exist
in 2D modeling. The data or clock path may cross different dies in through-silicon via (TSV)-based
3D IC. Therefore, the conventional variation modeling methods, such as on-chip variation (OCV),
advanced OCV (AOCV), parametric OCV (POCV), are not able to accurately capture the path
delay [131]. Samal et al. [131] use MARS to model the path delay variation in 3D ICs.
3D integration also brings challenges to the design optimization due to the expanded design space
and the overhead of design evaluation. To tackle these challenges, several studies [31, 122, 131] have
utilized design space exploration methods based on machine learning to facilitate 3D integration
optimization.
The state-of-the-art 3D placement methods [75, 121] perform bin-based tier partitioning on 2D
placement and routing design. However, the bin-based partitioning can cause significant quality
degradation to the 3D design because of the unawareness of the design hierarchy and technology.

14
G. Huang et al.
Table 3. Summary of ML for logic synthesis and physical design
Section
Task
ML Algorithm
Reference
Logic Synthesis
To decide which optimizer (AIG/MIG) should be utilized for
different circuits.
DNN
[115]
To classify the optimal synthesis flows.
CNN
[167]
To generate the optimal synthesis flows.
GCN,RL
[48]
To generate the optimal synthesis flows.
RL
[56]
Placement
To train, predict, and evaluate potential datapaths.
SVM,NN
[150]
To make placement decisions.
GCN,RL
[113]
Routing
To detect DRC hotspot and DRV count.
CNN
[154]
To predict routing congestion.
CNN
[89]
GAN
[6]
ML
[106]
MARS
[125]
To predict routability of a given placement.
MARS,SVM
[18]
To model on-chip router performance.
MARS
[63]
To predict wirelength.
LDA, KNN
[60]
To predict the circuit performance after placement stage.
ML
[27]
To predict detailed routing result after global routing.
ML
[82]
To model sign-off timing analysis.
RF
[8]
LR
[67]
To predict and optimize the clock tree.
GCN,CNN,RL
[102]
Power Deliver
Network Synthesis
and IR Drop
Predictions
To predict incremental static IR drop.
XGBoost
[54]
To predict dynamic IR drop by regressing.
CNN
[155]
To predict electromigration-induced IR drop.
GAN
[173]
To choose the power grid template.
MLP,CNN
[28]
To predict bump inductance.
SVM,ANN,MARS
[16]
3D Integration
To advance the tier partition.
GNN
[103]
To model the path delay variation.
MARS
[131]
To optimize 3D
designs.
Local Search
[31]
BO
[122]
Other
To predict the embedded memory timing failure.
ML
[17]
To predict aging effect.
RF
[11]
Considering the graph-like nature of the VLSI circuits, Lu et al. [103] proposed a GNN-based
unsupervised framework (TP-GNN) for tier partitioning. TP-GNN first performs the hierarchy-
aware edge contraction to acquire the clique-based graph where nodes within the same hierarchy
can be contracted into supernodes. Moreover, the hierarchy and the timing information is included
in the initial feature of each node before GNN training. Then the unsupervised GNN learning

Machine Learning for Electronic Design Automation: A Survey
15
can be applied to general 3D design. After the GNN training, the weighted k-means clustering is
performed on the clique-based graph for the tier assignment based on the learned representation.
The proposed TP-GNN framework is validated on experiments of RISC-V based multi-core system
and NETCARD from ISPD 2012 benchmark. The experiment results indicate 7.7% better wirelength,
27.4% higher effective frequency and 20.3% performance improvement.
4.5
Other Predictions
For other parameters, Chan et al. [17] adopt HSM to predict the embedded memory timing failure
during initial floorplan design. Bian et al. [11] work on aging effect prediction for high-dimensional
correlated on-chip variations using random forest.
4.6
Summary of Machine Learning for Logic Synthesis and Physical Design
We summarize recent studies on ML for logic synthesis and physical design in Table 3. For logic
synthesis, researchers focus on predicting and evaluating the optimal synthesis flows. Currently,
these studies optimize the synthesis flow based on the primitives of existing tools. In the future, we
expect to see more advanced algorithms for logic synthesis be explored, and more metrics can be
formulated to evaluate the results of logic synthesis. Besides, applying machine learning to logic
synthesis for emerging technologies is also an interesting direction.
In the physical design stage, recent studies mainly aim to improve the efficiency and accuracy by
predicting the related information that traditionally needs further simulation. A popular practice is
to formulate the EDA task as a computer vision (CV) task. In the future, we expect to see more
studies that incorporate advanced techniques (e.g., neural architecture search, automatic feature
generation, unsupervised learning) to achieve better routing and placement results.
5
LITHOGRAPHY AND MASK SYNTHESIS
Lithography is a key step in semiconductor manufacturing, which turns the designed circuit and
layout into real objects. Two popular research directions are lithography hotspot detection and
mask optimization. To improve yield, lithography hotspot detection is introduced after the physical
implementation flow to identify process-sensitive patterns prior to the manufacturing. The complete
optical simulation is always time-consuming, so it is necessary to analyze the routed layout by
machine learning to reduce lithography hotspots in the early stages. Mask optimization tries to
compensate diffraction information loss of design patterns such that the remaining pattern after
lithography is as close to the design patterns as possible. Mask optimization plays an important
role in VLSI design and fabrication flow, which is a very complicated optimization problem with
high verification costs caused by expensive lithography simulation. Unlike the hotspot detection
studies in Section 5.1 that take placement & routing stages into consideration, mask optimization
focuses only on the lithography process, ensuring that the fabricated chip matches the designed
layout. Optical proximity correction (OPC) and sub-resolution assist feature (SRAF) insertion are
two main methods to optimize the mask and improve the printability of the target pattern.
5.1
Lithography Hotspot Detection
For lithography hotspot detection, Ding et al. [32] uses SVM for hotspot detection and small neural
network for routing path prediction on each grid. To achieve better feature representation, Yang
et al. [162] introduces feature tensor extraction, which is aware of the spatial relations of layout
patterns. This work develops a batch-biased learning algorithm, which provides better trade-offs
between accuracy and false alarms. Besides, there are also attempts to check inter-layer failures
with deep learning solutions. A representative solution is proposed by Yang et al. [161]. They
employ an adaptive squish layout representation for efficient metal-to-via failure check. Different

16
G. Huang et al.
Region
Conventional 
Hotspot Detector
Clips
…
Hotspot
Non-
Hotspot
(a) Traditional Hotspot Detection
Region
Hotspot Core
Region-based 
Hotspot Detector
Feature Extraction
Clip Proposal Network
Reﬁnement
(b) Region-based Hotspot Detection
Fig. 6. Region-based hotspot detection promises better performance (reproduced from [22]).
layout-friendly neural network architectures are also investigated these include vanilla VGG [160],
shallow CNN [162] and binary ResNet [65].
With the increased chip complexity, traditional deep learning/machine learning-based solutions
are facing challenges from both runtime and detection accuracy. Chen et al. [22] recently propose
an end-to-end trainable object detection model for large scale hotspot detection. The framework
takes the input of a full/large-scale layout design and localizes the area that hotspots might occur
(see Figure 6). In [44], an attention-based CNN with inception-based backbone is developed for
better feature embeddings.
5.2
Machine Learning for Optical Proximity Correction
For OPC, inverse lithography technique (ILT) and model-based OPC are two representative mask
optimization methodologies, and each of which has its own advantages and disadvantages. Yang
et al. [163] propose a heterogeneous OPC framework that assists mask layout optimization, where
a deterministic ML model is built to choose the appropriate one from multiple OPC solutions for a
given design, as shown in Figure 7.
Classiﬁcation 
Model
ILT
MB-OPC
Mask
Mask
Design
Design
ILT
MB-OPC
Mask
Mask
Fig. 7. A heterogeneous OPC framework (reproduced from [163]).
With the improvement of semiconductor technology and the scaling down of ICs, traditional
OPC methodologies are becoming more and more complicated and time-consuming. Yang et al.
[159] propose a new OPC method based on generative adversarial network (GAN). A Generator
(G) is used to generate the mask pattern from the target pattern, and a discriminator (D) is used
to estimate the quality of the generated mask. GAN-OPC can avoid complicated computation

Machine Learning for Electronic Design Automation: A Survey
17
in ILT-based OPC, but it faces the problem that the algorithm is hard to converge. To deal with
this problem, ILT-guided pre-training is proposed. In the pre-training stage, the D network is
replaced with the ILT convolution model, and only the G network is trained. After pre-training,
the ILT model that has huge cost is removed, and the whole GAN is trained. The training flow
of GAN-OPC and ILT-guided pre-training is shown in Figure 8. The experimental results show
that the GAN-based methodology can accelerate ILT based OPC significantly and generate more
accurate mask patterns.
Generator
Real
Fake
  Feed-forward
 Back-propagetion
Discriminator
Litho-
Simulator
Generator
(a)
(b)
Fig. 8. The training flow of (a) GAN-OPC and (b) ILT-Guided Pre-training (reproduced from [159]).
Traditional ILT-based OPC methods are costly and result in highly complex masks where many
rectangular variable-shaped-beam (VSB) shots exist. To solve this problem, Jiang et al. [64] propose
an ML-based OPC algorithm named neural-ILT, which uses a neural network to replace the costly
ILT process. The loss function is specially designed to reduce the mask complexity, which gives
punishment to complicated output mask patterns. In addition, for fast litho-simulation, a CUDA-
based accelerator is proposed as well, which can save 96% simulation time. The experimental results
show that neural-ILT achieves a 70× speedup and 0.43× mask complexity compared with traditional
ILT methods.
Recently, Chen et al. [20] propose DAMO, an end-to-end OPC framework to tackle the full-
chip scale. The lithography simulator and mask generator share the same deep conditional GAN
(DCGAN), which is dedicatedly designed and can provide a competitively high resolution. The
proposed DCGAN adopts UNet++ [176] backbone and adds residual blocks at the bottleneck of
UNet++. To further apply DAMO on full-chip layouts, a coarse-to-fine window splitting algorithm
is proposed. First, it locates the regions of high via density and then runs KMeans++ algorithm
on each cluster containing the via pattern to find the best splitting window. Results on ISPD 2019
full-chip layout show that DAMO outperforms state-of-the-art OPC solutions in both academia [43]
and an industrial toolkit.
5.3
Machine Learning for SRAF Insertion
Several studies have investigated ML-aided SRAF insertion techniques. Xu et al. [158] propose an
SRAF insertion framework based on ML techniques. Geng et al. [43] propose a framework with a
better feature extraction strategy. Figure 9 shows the feature extraction stage. After their concentric
circle area sampling (CCAS) method, high-dimension features 𝑥𝑡are mapped into a discriminative
low-dimension features 𝑦𝑡through dictionary training by multiplication of an atom matrix 𝐷. The
atom matrix is the dictionary consists of representative atoms of the original features. Then, the
sparse codes 𝑦𝑡are used as the input of a machine learning model, more specifically, a logistic
regression model that outputs a probability map indicating whether SRAF should be inserted at

18
G. Huang et al.
each grid. Then, the authors formulate and solve the SRAF insertion problem as an integer linear
programming based on the probability grid and various SRAF design rules.
⇡
D
yt
xt
{
N
{
s
{
s
{
N
Fig. 9. Dictionary learning based feature extraction (reproduced from [43]).
5.4
Machine Learning for Lithography Simulation
There are also studies that focus on fast simulation of the tedious lithography process. Traditional
lithography simulation contains multiple steps, such as optical model building, resist model building,
and resist pattern generation. LithoGAN [165] proposes an end-to-end lithography modeling method
by using GAN, of which the framework is shown in Figure 10. Specifically, a conditional GAN is
trained to map the mask pattern to a resist pattern. However, due to the characteristic of GAN,
the generated shape pattern is good, while the position of the pattern is not precise. To tackle this
problem, LithoGAN adopts a conditional GAN for shape modeling and a CNN for center prediction.
The experimental results show that LithoGAN can predict the resist pattern with high accuracy,
and this algorithm can reduce the lithography simulation time for several orders of magnitude. [20]
is also equipped with a machine learning-based lithography simulator that can output via contours
accurately to assist via-oriented OPC.
CGAN
CNN
(𝐶ℎ, 𝐶𝑣)
Generated Image
Predicted Center
Pre-Adjustment
Post-Adjustment
(Final)
Fig. 10. The LithoGAN framework (reproduced from [165]).
5.5
Summary
This section reviews ML techniques used in the design for manufacturability stage that include
lithography hotspot detection, mask optimization and lithography modeling. Related studies are
summarized in Table 4.
6
ANALOG DESIGN
Despite the promotion of digital circuits, the analog counterpart is still irreplaceable in applications
like nature signal processing, high speed I/O and drive electronics [126]. Unlike digital circuit
design, analog design demands lots of manual work and expert knowledge, which often makes

Machine Learning for Electronic Design Automation: A Survey
19
Table 4. Summary of ML for lithography and mask optimization
Task
Work
ML Algorithm
