Entropy Non-increasing Games for the
Improvement of Dataﬂow Programming
Norbert B´atfai, Ren´at´o Besenczi, Gerg˝o Bogacsovics,
Fanny Monori∗
October 25, 2018
Abstract
In this article, we introduce a new conception of a family of esport
games called Samu Entropy to try to improve dataﬂow program graphs
like the ones that are based on Google’s TensorFlow. Currently, the Samu
Entropy project speciﬁes only requirements for new esport games to be
developed with particular attention to the investigation of the relationship
between esport and artiﬁcial intelligence. It is quite obvious that there is
a very close and natural relationship between esport games and artiﬁcial
intelligence. Furthermore, the project Samu Entropy focuses not only on
using artiﬁcial intelligence, but on creating AI in a new way. We present
a reference game called Face Battle that implements the Samu Entropy
requirements.
Keywords: esport, TensorFlow, computation graphs, gamiﬁcation, robopsychol-
ogy.
1
Introduction
By now, playing massively multiplayer online (MMO) games has become a part
of daily routine. Many computer game competitions and a whole new indus-
try called esport is being built on the MMO game concept. The development
of esports has been living in close symbiosis with the evolution of artiﬁcial in-
telligence research. The collaboration between Google DeepMind and Blizzard
Entertainment1 can also be interpreted as a next milestone in the development
of artiﬁcial intelligence.
In the present paper, we are going to introduce a
new esport game family concept called Samu Entropy (or ESAMU, for short)
[B´at17b], [BBL+17]. The ESAMU concept is outlined in the English translation
of its developer’s guide2 [BBS16].
Automated development of artiﬁcial convolutional neural network architec-
tures is a hot topic in machine learning (ML). For example, papers [ZL16] and
∗All authors are with the Department of Information Technology, University of Debrecen,

1DeepMind
and
Blizzard
to
release
StarCraft
II
as
an
AI
research
environ-
ment,
https://deepmind.com/blog/deepmind-and-blizzard-release-starcraft-ii-
ai-research-environment/
2Pre-release
of
the
Samu
Entropy
documentation,
https://github.com/nbatfai/
SamuEntropy/releases/tag/v0.0.1.
1
arXiv:1702.04389v1  [cs.AI]  14 Feb 2017

[BGNR16] present reinforcement learning approaches to develop the comput-
ing models, where the former one is based on TensorFlow (TF) computational
graphs [AAB+16] and the latter one uses Q-learning. The authors of paper
[VSR+16] reported an evolutionary computing approach. As the main result
of this paper, we introduce a new esport based approach to reﬁne TensorFlow
computational graphs. Speciﬁcally, we introduce a concept of an esport game
with which a player will be able to search better neural network architectures.
To embed a scientiﬁc challenge into a computer game is a well-known idea.
The examples for this have ranged from science ﬁction stories to hard-core sci-
ence (see for example the science ﬁction book SGU [Swa09, pp. 32] or the scien-
tiﬁc puzzle game called Foldit [CTB+10]). It is important to note that ESAMU
is not a typical human-computing [TSBW16] or citizen science [PHS15] game
but, in contrast with the previously mentioned games, it is intended to become
a killer application. At the present time, applications based on machine learning
are becoming closer and closer to the normal everyday life. Nonetheless, devel-
oping deep learning applications is still a scientiﬁc task which requires highly
trained and experienced professionals from this ﬁeld. In our vision, an appli-
cation, which implements the ESAMU concepts, can take the whole machine
learning science closer to the public by giving a simpliﬁed interface for AI algo-
rithms and methods. Certainly, killer apps cannot be “developed”, as nobody
can decide whether a computer program becomes successful or not. But, with
developing such an application we hope that it will gain a high level of attention,
not only from the scientiﬁc community, but from a large segment of the public.
Accordingly, ESAMU is not a speciﬁc game but only a speciﬁcation set for the
games to be developed.
It seems that TensorFlow may be the Pax Romana of machine learning pro-
gramming (paper [Gol16] shows a timeline of machine learning programming
languages and the second one of the milestone works [MKS+15] and [SHM+16]
used TensorFlow3). TensorFlow is an open source heterogeneous machine learn-
ing software platform for running TensorFlow computational graphs on CPU,
GPU, TPU, Android or iOS. By using computational graphs in a central role,
TensorFlow (Python or C++ based) API programming can be regarded as a
kind of classical dataﬂow programming [Sou12], [Kah74].
In the following, a short description of the ESAMU concept [BBS16] will be
presented by way of a speciﬁc game called Face Battle. We focus on the question
of embedding a TensorFlow computational graph into a computer game. At the
current stage of the research, the graph of MNIST4 tutorial example [Aut17]
will be used.
2
Face Battle
In the ESAMU esport family, every game will be developed following ﬁve arche-
types, so all ESAMU games must implement these behaviors.
Every game
will implement some sort of machine learning task, so we require a dedicated
archetype for implementing AI methods. This ﬁrst archetype is called “Samu,
the Brain”. Practically, this archetype uses currently available machine learning
3See
https://research.googleblog.com/2016/01/alphago-mastering-ancient-game-
of-go.html
4MNIST For ML Beginners, https://www.tensorflow.org/tutorials/mnist/beginners/
2

algorithms and paradigms (with the primary focus on deep learning), and it can
be extended in the future. Because the proper usage and sometimes even the
understanding of these machine learning primitives can be diﬃcult for non-
experts, we use the “Gr´eta, the Builder” (GTB) archetype for ﬁne-tuning end-
to-end machine learning “ﬂows”.
In our vision, one implementation of this
archetype could be an application where the user can ﬁne tune the dataﬂow
graph of Inception v3 [SVI+15] if the player wants to create an application
suitable for object recognition. The apps implementing Samu and Gr´eta are
universal. That means that these two archetypes are independent from a speciﬁc
implementation of ESAMU, and can be used in other ESAMU games. The apps
from the archetype of Samu execute TF graphs and the apps from the archetype
of Gr´eta give the possibility to edit and ﬁne-tune that TF graph. The “N´andi,
the Teacher” archetype is applied for the implementation of software that can
use supervised learning.
The archetype called “Matyi, the Hunter” consists
of software that provide perception and intervention, e.g. in the Face Battle
application, collecting images of faces can be considered as a software for this
archetype. The archetype “Erika, the Fighter” realizes the competition aspect
of ESAMU games, e.g. in the Face Battle game, comparing the accuracy of face
recognition can be considered as a simple implementation of this archetype, but
its main motivation is to provide an esport experience for ESAMU games (i.e.
esport competitions that can be organized in an arena).
In the rest of this section, we give a description about how we use these
archetypes in the Face Battle game.
2.1
Samu, the Brain
The main purpose of this archetype is to execute TF graphs. Our main question
is, what is the most suitable ML architecture for a corresponding task?
There are several well-known ML architectures that perform well on various
datasets. In the past few years, convolutional neural networks (CNN) [LBBH98]
have made a reasonable break-through in the ﬁeld. One of the earliest works
that had a great impact was reported by Krizhevsky et al. in [KSH12]. This
architecture used ﬁve convolutional layers and three fully connected layers and
introduced several new solutions (e.g. “dropout”). Another approach is the
Inception architecture that is ﬁrst introduced in [SLJ+14]. This architecture
was 22 layers deep, which ignited the spread of very deep CNNs. Later, the
Inception architecture was improved to achieve better performance [SVI+15].
The aforementioned solutions were trained and tested on the ImageNet open
dataset. Face recognition is also considered as a classical AI task. One example
is DeepFace [TYRW14] and its improved version FaceNet [SKP15], both were
trained and tested on Labeled Faces in the Wild and YouTube Faces dataset,
and set the state-of-the-art performance in its time of publishing. Since the
dataﬂow graph of these architectures are huge (tens of thousands of nodes in
some cases), we are planning to provide a basic version that the player can ﬁne-
tune, so they do not need to build it from scratch. In the game Face Battle,
this could be the dataﬂow graph of FaceNet.
These examples show us that some sort of a natural evolution can be seen
in machine intelligence. This evolution is obviously powered by science and the
natural need to create more and more eﬃcient AI algorithms. But, this cre-
ation requires highly trained and experienced professionals. With the ESAMU
3

Figure 1: A screenshot of the app Motherboard Builder, which is a prototype
for the GTB archetype.
concept, we try to create an architecture that can facilitate this evolution by
connecting non-expert gamers to the AI research communities.
2.2
Gr´eta, the Builder
In the game Face Battle, the Motherboard Builder is our ﬁrst rapid prototype5
for the GTB archetype. One key point of this motherboard approach is that we
can place various objects related to computing on its surface. The idea came
from the appearance and functionality of a motherboard of a desktop computer.
Just like a real one, it can be equipped with several diﬀerent “devices”, which
can be changed, modiﬁed or upgraded later. In the aspect of an ESAMU game,
these objects can be TF nodes (e.g. a CNN layer). It is not rare for a TensorFlow
graph to have several thousand nodes. For example, the model of the TF tutorial
example MNIST contains 137 nodes, but more sophisticated ones can contain
tens of thousands of nodes. Building this from scratch on a screen or reviewing
such a huge graph is impossible. Our aim is to simplify the visualization of
complex ML architectures, so it would be easier to view the whole graph and
ﬁne-tune individual nodes.
One of our main research question is: how can
a complex TensorFlow graph be visualized so that the possibility to ﬁne-tune
individual nodes could remain. In section 3.1, we will present some more ideas
about the GTB archetype. Figure 1 shows a screenshot of Motherboard Builder.
2.3
N´andi, the Teacher
This archetype provides supervised learning in games where it is necessary. In
the game Face Battle, this archetype will implement a set of possible annotations
and corrections related to the images taken by players. This will allow players to
connect persons, emotions, locations, etc. to images, and to correct any possible
misclassiﬁcation (e.g. emotion recognition).
5See
in
repository
https://github.com/nbatfai/SamuEntropy/tree/master/FACE_
BATTLE/Greta/GretaTheBuilder
4

2.4
Matyi, the Hunter
This archetype is responsible for perception, data collection and, in some cases,
intervention. In Face Battle, it will provide photo acquisition. It is important
to implement this archetype in Face Battle, because we want to collect images
about faces only. Therefore, some sort of pre-processing is required, e.g. face
segmentation or alignment. In addition, this part of the software will have a
function to recognize emotions too.
2.4.1
Face Battle Dataset
For every ESAMU game, distinct datasets are required to perform machine
learning tasks. Using open datasets for testing face recognition methods are
becoming a common practice, the number of open datasets is growing (see e.g.:
[LMHR+16], [YLLL14], [LLWT15], [ZZWS12], [KSSMB16], [NW14]). In our
basic concept, every game has its own dataset and every dataset is open, more-
over, every subset is linked to a certain player, who collected the corresponding
data, via a social network proﬁle. To the best of our knowledge, this will be
the ﬁrst public dataset where images are linked to people, except for datasets
related to celebrities.
2.5
Erika, the Fighter
This archetype will oﬀer the possibility of building a competition around Face
Battle. This will be the part of the game where the players can compare each
other’s “learning architecture”, or more precisely, the eﬃciency (i.e. the error
rate) of their face classiﬁcation procedure.
One use could be the following: players will give each other some pictures
about themselves. After learning these pictures, the accuracy of classiﬁcation of
other pictures of the same player will be compared. The player with the better
accuracy wins the battle.
3
Entropy Non-increasing Interfaces of Games
First of all, it should be noted that the entropy non-increasing property of ele-
ments of the game interface should be understood only as an intuitive metaphor,
because the entropy of game’s display is nearly independent from the order of
what is viewed in the display (see [Pen16, pp. 402] for an analogous example
of a similar situation). The inspiration behind the idea of the game having an
entropy non-increasing property is RTS (Real-Time Strategy) games we play.
Exemplary well-known RTS games are Age of Empires6, Warcraft7, StarCraft8,
or the Cossacks9 series, which were among the ﬁrst generation of RTS games.
Newer games like Clash of Clans10, or the open-source 0 A.D.11 also have great
player base. The environment in these games may diﬀer somewhat, but the
6https://www.ageofempires.com/
7https://worldofwarcraft.com
8http://www.battle.net/sc2
9http://gsc-game.com/
10http://supercell.com/en/games/clashofclans/
11https://play0ad.com/, https://github.com/0ad/0ad
5

Figure 2: An illustration of “entropy” non-increasing property with two mo-
ments in the game 0 A.D.
main tasks a player can perform are roughly the same. In an RTS game, the
players usually start with an empty map without buildings and full of resources.
Then by collecting these resources, the player can build more buildings, create
playable units, improve their structures and generally move forward in the game.
While playing with RTS games one can observe that the more the game pro-
gresses the more arranged it is. We believe that the game has its “entropy”
at the highest in the beginning of the game with the empty map. With every
“good” move the player makes the more ordered it becomes, so in our inter-
pretation its “entropy” is decreasing.
By good move, we intuitively mean a
constructive event made by the player that moves him closer to winning. In
ﬁgure 2 we illustrate this idea with two moments from the 0 A.D. game. We
think in some cases this non-increasing property can also be perceived visually,
as the map of the game looks more arranged as the game progresses. The part
of the game that implements the GTB archetype will have functions that are
somewhat similar to building and creating activities in RTS games.
3.1
Towards the Gamiﬁcation of GTB
The main purpose of the GTB archetype is to answer the research question:
how can a TensorFlow computational graph be converted into the interface of
a massively multiplayer game. At the current stage of the research, it seems
that it is reasonable to focus on some MMORTS (Massively Multiplayer Online
6

in
out
x
y
1011
0101
(a) y = rnd(x)
in
out
x
y
1011
1011
(b) y = x
in
out
x
y
1011
0110
(c) y = 2 ∗x (with overﬂow)
Figure 3: This ﬁgure shows a ﬁctional computing device where the programming
is done by arrangement of the box. The ﬁrst box (an idealization of a computer
program) has no internal walls. The second one contains 3 internal walls and
the third one contains 4 internal walls. Accordingly, it follows that the other
two programs have smaller entropy than the ﬁrst one.
Real-Time Strategy) game to be developed from scratch.
In a typical RTS game, the elements of the game (e.g.
buildings, army,
town hall and other items) will become more and more sophisticated (or more
complex) as times goes on. The ESAMU speciﬁcation suggests measuring the
development of these items in bits. From our point of view, the user interface of
the game to be developed is a diﬀerent visualization of a corresponding Tensor-
Flow computation graph. After all, we would like to measure the goodness (the
level of development) of elements of a computation graph. So, we would like to
measure the goodness of the source code of pieces of the graph. First, we focus
on the development of the whole source code as execution time goes on12.
Let us start with the question, how can we measure the order of a source
code? For example, how can we measure the order of a C or Python source
code? There are several classical complexity measures, for example the cyclo-
matic complexity [McC76], but these can measure only some features of the
source code.
The cyclomatic complexity measures how readable the investi-
gated source code snippet is but it cannot tell us about the real goodness of the
code. That is why these measures cannot be considered objective. For a totally
objective measure we could use some Kolmogorov complexity based measure,
but it would not be computable due to the fact that the Kolmogorov complexity
is not recursive (here it should be noticed that the similarity metric [LCL+04] is
12In our present approach, the changing neural network weights are considered as part of
the source code.
7

xi
yi
xi+1
yi+1
wij
wi+1j
NNi:
NNi+1:
backpropagation
Figure 4: This ﬁgure shows a neural network between two consecutive training
steps.
a Kolmogorov complexity based measure and it is computable for example with
the use of CompLearn [CV05]). Another possibility is to investigate sources as
a directed graph of generalized function calls13. In this case, the generalized
functions can be sorted by their PageRank [PBMW99] values. But this order
can make a recursive statement: a function that is called by better functions is
better14.
How can we measure the development of computer programs? As it is well
known, the Kolmogorov complexity has a strong relationship with the entropy
[Lov94, pp. 69]. Consider the ﬁctional computing device shown in ﬁgure 3.
In these boxes, the programming is implemented by the internal arrangements
of walls. The input particles are prepared on the left side and the output will
appear on the right side as the time goes on15. Using the notation of ﬁgure 3,
K(x 7→rnd(x)) > K(x 7→x) ≃K(x 7→2x) intuitively shows that the entropy
changes in the same direction as the Kolmogorov complexity. But these and
similar imaginable measures tell us nothing about the questions: does the code
meet its requirements or does the code ﬁt for a particular purpose. This is why
the test-driven development methodology uses more or less independent tests
in today’s software engineering practices.
In contrast, in the neural computing paradigm the evaluation of the ﬁtness
of the programs for a particular purpose (aka the artiﬁcial neural networks) is
an essential feature. Consider the training and testing of the networks, they are
investigated roughly in the same fashion. For example, in a classiﬁcation task, if
we use TensorFlow, we will typically examine accuracy curves in TensorBoard.
Consider a practical question: after 10 training steps, is the complexity of a
neural network the same as after 1000 steps? Based on ﬁgure 4, it is clearly
observed that K(NNi+1) ≤|xi| + |NNi|. If we suppose that the initial weight
vector w0j is selected from a random distribution, then the equation suggests
13For example, as like in C++ a+b; →operator+(a, b); and in a similar way it can be
imagine that for(stat1; expr1; expr2) stat2; →statementfor(stat1, expr1, expr2, stat2); and
so on.
14We had made similar measurements with running codes using AspectJ in paper [B´at11].
15Because of the probability nature of this computing device, we cannot give an accurate
upper bound of its execution time.
8

that the complexity (together with the entropy) is the biggest at the beginning.
Both this and the previous ﬁgure contradict with our naive intuition that pro-
gramming increases complexity. Therefore, in GTB, we must try to measure
the sophistication level of the program GTB based on its ﬁtness for a particular
purpose. We will try to convert the usually applied accuracy into a measure
that could be computed in bits.
Our vision is to create the roots of a new
type of gamiﬁcation by using some similar measure that allows casual gamers
to participate in the revolution of artiﬁcial intelligence. The idea is to assign the
measured values to the elements of the interface in GTB. The ﬁrst suggested
theme for the game interface is the Motherboard Builder introduced in section
2.2. An imaginary element that has already been closely integrated with this
theme can be seen in ﬁgure 5. This ﬁgure shows an abstraction of a processor
that has 2.6 bits of information accuracy.
Information Accuracy
At this point, we present an example to illustrate how the usual accuracy can
be converted into information. Let us consider the following example16.
Let Y_ = (y_i) denote the sequence of labels of input images where y_i ∈
{0, 1}n is a one-hot vector corresponded to an input image17. And let Y = (pi)
denote the probabilities of classiﬁcations where pi ∈Rn such that Pn
j=1 pi(j) =
1. Then, using the entropies of labels E = (ei), ei ∈R, ei = −Pn
j=1 pi(j)log2pi(j)
we can deﬁne the information accuracy as follow infoacc = Pm
i=1 aiei where
ai =
 −1
if yi ̸= y_i
1
otherwise
that is ai simply shows that the classiﬁcation of the i-th image is good or bad
and m is the number of classiﬁed images in the sequence Y_. Or to be more
readable and precise
plogp = t f . multiply ( prob ,
t f . log ( prob )/ t f . log ( 2 . 0 ) )
plogpsum = −t f . reduce sum ( plogp ,
1 ,
keep dims=True )
plusminus = t f . cast ( c o r r e c t p r e d i c t i o n ,
t f . f l o a t 3 2 )∗2.0 −1.0
plusminus = t f . reshape ( plusminus ,
[ batchsize ,
1 ] )
i n f o = t f . multiply ( plogpsum ,
plusminus )
i n f o a c c = t f . reduce sum ( i n f o )
/
t f . cast ( batchsize ,
t f . f l o a t 3 2 )
where the tensor prob holds the vectors of probabilities of classiﬁcations and
batchsize is the number of images.
Figure 6 shows some usual accuracy curves with batchsize of 10, 100, 1000
and 10000. The corresponding information accuracy curves are shown in ﬁgure
7. We can observe that the shapes of the curves are the same, but the scale has
changed. So, the “learning” of the neural network architecture is followed by
the information accuracy of the learning procedure.
16It can be seen in detail in the forked TensorFlow repository https://github.com/nbatfai/
tensorflow/blob/master/tensorflow/examples/tutorials/mnist.
The presented Python
code snippet can be found in the ﬁle called mnist softmax esmu.py.
17In this example n equals 10 due to a label is a digit between 0 and 9.
9

{(x, y)}
in
out
x
y
train/test
infoacc
(a) This ﬁgure shows the typi-
cal use cases of a neural network
based program where we replace
the usual accuracy by information
accuracy.
(b) This is an imaginary chip
which represents the gamiﬁcation
of the MNIST graph of the Ten-
sorFlow tutorial.
Figure 5: A gamiﬁcation of a whole network is shown in general in 5a and
a speciﬁc gamiﬁcation element is shown in 5b. The label ROBOPSYCHOL-
OGY on the chip is only a design element that suggests that there is a higher
interpretation level of our work. See [B´at17a] and [BB17] for more detail.
Figure 6: This ﬁgure shows the usual accuracy curves of MNIST tutorial in
TensorBoard.
4
Conclusion
From a pure theoretical point of view, our present work can be regarded as a
set of preliminary studies regarding the following questions: What notion of
complexity levels are we looking for to the gamiﬁcation of computing graphs?
How can we measure the aliveness of the code?
How could the code resist
against increasing entropy? The latter two questions have already focused on
the approach introduced by Erwin Schr¨odinger in his famous book [Sch44] to
investigate living systems. To apply his ideas in the ﬁeld of computer science
seems a very interesting challenge18. The thought experiments shown in ﬁg-
ure 3 and 4 contradicts our intuitive expectation that programming increases
complexity (entropy), therefore in this sense, programming is similar to entropy
18In the terminology of Turing machines, we have already formulated a similar question in
https://github.com/nbatfai/AlgorithmicFractals/tree/master/manuscript.
10

Figure 7: This ﬁgure shows the information accuracy curves corresponding to
the curves in ﬁgure 6.
non-increasing behavior of living systems.
The work described in this paper has formed and crystallized our main re-
search question: how can a TensorFlow computational graph be visualized on
the surface of a massively multiplayer game?
Simplifying a TF graph with-
out losing important components and providing a possibility to ﬁne-tune it by
non-expert gamers at the same time seems an interesting challenge. We think,
answering this question is crucial to making a big leap towards the manifes-
tation of the conception of widely open AI. Google with the TensorFlow API
have simpliﬁed the prototyping of ML architectures and have made it easier
to experiment with new ideas, even though it requires broad knowledge in AI
methods and algorithms. In our vision, a powerful tool that can speed up the
evolution of ML by widening the group of people who working with it, can
be applications that implement the ESAMU concept. By playing these games,
which we consider as an embryonic form of robopsychology, we may get closer
to the creation of The Artiﬁcial Intelligence in its universal form.
Acknowledgment
The authors would like to thank the students of the BSc course of “High Level
Programming Languages” in the fall semester of 2016/2017 at the University
of Debrecen and the community members of the group UDPROG19 for their
interest and for their testing and contribution to the repository of ESAMU
[B´at17b]. Special thanks to the members of the mailing list desport20. The
authors also would like to thank Mih´aly Szil´agyi and Louis Joseph Mattia for
the proofreading of the paper.
