MIXTURE OF BASIS FOR INTERPRETABLE CONTINUAL
LEARNING WITH DISTRIBUTION SHIFTS
A PREPRINT
Mengda Xu ∗
JPMorgan AI Research

Sumitra Ganesh∗
JPMorgan AI Research

Pranay Pasula
JPMorgan AI Research

ABSTRACT
Continual learning in environments with shifting data distributions is a challenging problem with
several real-world applications. In this paper we consider settings in which the data distribution
(task) shifts abruptly and the timing of these shifts are not known. Furthermore, we consider a semi-
supervised task-agnostic setting in which the learning algorithm has access to both task-segmented
and unsegmented data for ofﬂine training. We propose a novel approach called Mixture of Basis
models (MoB) for addressing this problem setting. The core idea is to learn a small set of basis
models and to construct a dynamic, task-dependent mixture of the models to predict for the current
task. We also propose a new methodology to detect observations that are out-of-distribution with
respect to the existing basis models and to instantiate new models as needed. We test our approach in
multiple domains and show that it attains better prediction error than existing methods in most cases,
while using fewer models than other multiple model approaches. Moreover, we analyze the latent
task representations learned by MoB and show that similar tasks tend to cluster in the latent space
and that the latent representation shifts at the task boundaries when tasks are dissimilar.
1
Introduction
Continual learning in environments with shifting data distributions is a challenging problem with several real-world
applications e.g. weather and ﬁnancial market data are known to have regime shifts. In this paper, we consider settings
where the data distribution (or task) shifts abruptly but the timing of these shifts are not known. In such domains,
segmenting historical data into tasks is often a difﬁcult problem in itself and much of the data available is likely to be
unsegmented. Motivated by this practical challenge, we consider a semi-supervised task-agnostic setting in which the
learning algorithm has access to both task-segmented and unsegmented data for ofﬂine training. Typically segmented
data will be available only for a small set of tasks. In the online setting the algorithm does not observe task boundaries
and encounters new tasks that were not present in the ofﬂine dataset.
For a learning algorithm to perform robustly in the presence of these distribution shifts, it must be able to recall
previously encountered tasks as well as quickly adapt to new tasks by appropriately reusing elements from what was
previously learned.
Contributions: Our key contribution in this paper is a new approach to the aforementioned problem that is based on
a mixture of basis models (inspired by basis functions/vectors). The core idea is to learn a small set of basis models
and to construct a dynamic, task-depdendent mixture of these models to predict for the current task. We also propose
a new methodology to detect observations that are out-of-distribution with respect to the existing basis models and
to instantiate new models. Our methodology uses a combination of model error and uncertainty to account for both
covariate and concept shifts. Thus our approach allows for dynamic reuse of previously learned basis models across
multiple tasks while simultaneously expanding the basis set as needed to adapt to new tasks.
In our experiments on a synthetic regression domain and MuJoCo environments (HalfCheetah), we show that our
approach, Mixture of Basis (MoB), achieves better mean-squared error (MSE) than comparable methods (MOLe
∗Contributed equally
arXiv:2201.01853v1  [cs.LG]  5 Jan 2022

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
Nagabandi et al. [2019], continuous adaptation, meta-learning based k-shot adaptation) in most cases. Compared to
other multiple model methods such as MOLe, our approach uses signiﬁcantly fewer basis models indicating that our
mixture-based approach allows for better reuse of previously learned models.
Moreover, MoB learns interpretable task representations that can be especially useful in a task-agnostic setting to gain
insight and conﬁdence in the model’s inference and prediction. We analyze the latent task representations learned by
MoB and ﬁnd that similar tasks tend to cluster together in the latent space and that the latent representation shifts at task
boundaries when tasks are dissimilar.
2
Problem Statement
Tt−1
Tt
Tt+1
Xt−1
Xt
Xt+1
Yt−1
Yt
Yt+1
Figure 1: Generative model for non-stationary environment. The shaded variables (inputs Xt and targets Yt) are
observed; the task T is unobserved.
Our goal is to learn a model that accurately predicts target variables Yt from inputs Xt in a non-stationary environment
in which the data distribution PTt(Yt|Xt) can shift with time (depending on the task) and the task process Tt is Markov
(see Fig.1).
We consider a semi-supervised task-agnostic setting in which the learning algorithm has access to both task-segmented
Dl and unsegmented data Du for ofﬂine training (see Fig.2). Note that this is similar to most task-agnostic continual
learning approaches [Caccia et al., 2020, He et al., 2019, He and Sick, 2021, Jerfel et al., 2018, Nagabandi et al.,
2019] that assume that task segmented data is available for ofﬂine training; the main difference is that we also leverage
unsegmented data.
The problems are: (a) Ofﬂine training: How do we effectively train the model using the ofﬂine dataset?, and (b)
Online adaptation: How do we update the model in the online setting to adapt to task shifts and new tasks that were
not in the ofﬂine dataset?
Figure 2: Ofﬂine and Online: overview of training and updates. The segmented dataset contains samples for S tasks
Dl := {D1
l , · · · , DS
l } (here S = 2). The unsegmented dataset contains trajectories τ = (x0:T , y0:T ).
2

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
3
Methods
The core idea in our approach - Mixture of Basis models (MoB) - is that we could dynamically combine the predictions
from a set of what we call basis models to predict the target for the current task.
Basis Model Deﬁnition: A basis model is a model b(X) that predicts Y for a given X. With a slight abuse of notation,
we will also use b(Y |X) to denote the probability of Y given X under the basis model; point estimates for Y are
constructed by taking the expected value of this distribution. Given a set of K basis models {b(i)}i=1:K and a latent
task representation Zt ∈Rd for the current task Tt, we express the conditional distribution of Yt given Xt and Zt as the
mixture
P(Yt|Xt, Zt) =
K
X
i=1
wi(Zt) b(i)(Yt|Xt)
(1)
where w(Z) maps the latent task representation to the standard simplex (i.e., PK
i=1 wi(Zt) = 1 and wi(Zt) ≥0 for
i = 1, . . . , K). Note that the mixing network w() takes only the task representation as input, whereas the basis models
are task-agnostic. We will ﬁrst describe MoB’s learning and inference procedure for a ﬁxed number of basis models
and then tackle the problem of when and how to add new basis models.
Figure 3: MoB pipeline.
3.1
Learning and Inference with a Fixed Basis Set
Let’s ﬁrst consider that we have a ﬁxed number of basis models, and would like to infer the latent task representations
and make predictions, given a stream of observations τ := (x0:T , y0:T ) 2.
We use a sequential VAE construction (Chung et al. [2015], Krishnan et al. [2015]) and learn the parameters θ and
φ of the model P and the inference model q, respectively, by maximizing the ELBO L(τ; θ, φ) w.r.t. θ and φ (see
supplementary for full derivation).
L(τ; θ, φ) = EZt∼qφ
" T
X
t=0
log Pθ(yt|xt, Zt)
#
−
T
X
t=1
EZt−1∼qφ[DKL(qφ(Zt|Zt−1, xt, yt)
||Pθ(Zt|Zt−1)]
The ﬁrst term measures the average reconstruction error using the model Pθ and the latent variables sampled from
qφ, while the second term acts as a regularization constraining KL-divergence between the approximating posterior
distribution qφ and the prior over the task process Zt.
2Notation: We will use capital letters (e.g. Zt) to denote random variables and small letters (e.g. zt) to denote realiza-
tions/observations of the random variable
3

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
In order to compute the gradients w.r.t. the inference model parameters we use the re-parameterization trick in Kingma
and Welling [2013] and estimate the ELBO as:
ˆL(τ; θ, φ) =
T
X
t=0
log Pθ(yt|xt, zt) +
T
X
t=1
log Pθ(zt|zt−1)
(2)
−
T
X
t=1
log qφ(zt|zt−1, xt, yt))
(3)
(4)
where zt = µφ(zt−1, xt, yt) + σφ(zt−1, xt, yt) ⊙ϵ and ϵ ∼N(0, I). Note that the model Pθ here uses the mixture of
basis formulation in Eq. 1 and has three components: (i) the mixture network wθ(Z), (ii) the basis models b(i)
θ (Y |X),
and (iii) the prior task model pθ(Zt|Zt−1).
Pre-trained basis models: In theory the basis models could be learned using the above procedure. However, we found
in practice that this often led to the basis models being too similar to one another. To overcome this issue, we instead
use the segmented task dataset Dl to pre-train a basis model for each task and then allow for adaptation.
Uncertainty estimation using ensembles: We would like to estimate the uncertainty in each basis model in order
to assess when to instantiate new models. We use deep ensembles [Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017] for uncertainty
estimation by training an ensemble of M networks {b(i)
j }j=1:M for each basis model b(i). Each model b(i)
j
in the
ensemble outputs the mean and variance of an isotropic Gaussian i.e. b(i)
j (Y |X = x) = N(µij(x), σij(x)). As in
Lakshminarayanan et al. [2017], we weigh each model in the ensemble equally to construct the predictive distribution
for the i-the basis as mixture of Gaussians,
b(i)(Yt|Xt) = 1
M
M
X
j=1
b(i)
j (Yt|Xt)
(5)
and a point estimate
ˆyt = 1
M
K
X
i=1
wi(zt)
M
X
j=1
µij(xt)
(6)
Fast basis instantiation using MAML: During ofﬂine and online training, we might have only few data points
available for instantiation of a basis model. To enable fast instantiation, we use a meta-learned prior using MAML [Finn
et al., 2017]. Since we need ensemble basis models, we train an ensemble MAML prior {θ∗
j }M
j=1 using the segmented
task dataset and b(i)
j
is adapted to task Ti from θ∗
j using the segmented data Di
l for that task.
3.2
Adding New Basis Models
For our approach to be able to adapt to new tasks in the ofﬂine or online setting, it needs to detect when the observations
are out-of-distribution (OoD) with respect to the current set of models. Prediction errors [He and Sick, 2021] and model
uncertainty [Farquhar and Gal, 2018] have been used to detect OoD samples or distribution shifts. In case of covariate
shift, where inputs X are OoD with respect to the ofﬂine dataset, well-calibrated models would have high uncertainty.
But in case of a concept shift, the model could be conﬁdent in its predictions (it has seen similar inputs X before)
while still making errors because P(Y |X) had changed. To reliably handle both types of shifts, we propose a novel
Out-of-Distribution Detection Score (ODDS) that combines model uncertainty and error.
[t]
To decide whether a data point (x, y) is OoD or not, we deﬁne a binary random variable D that can take values {I, O}
where I and O denote in and out of distribution, respectively. The decision on whether (x, y) is OoD can then be based
on the score
SODDS(x, y) := P(y|D = O, x)P(D = O|x)
P(y|D = I, x)P(D = I|x)
(7)
with a default threshold of 1. Note that, just as with model uncertainty, P(D|x) only depends on the input observation
x. On the other hand, the likelihood P(y|D, x) is evaluated after the ground truth y is observed (similar to the model
error).
4

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
Figure 4: Model uncertainty and error for different scenarios of X and Y |X being in or out of distribution.
Algorithm 1: ODDS - Instantiating new basis
1 Input:(xt, yt); meta-learned prior {θ∗
j }M
j=1
2 if SODDS(xt, yt) > 1 then
3
Add (xt, yt) into OOD buffer Q
4 end
5 if |Q| > L then
6
Adapt bnew
j
from θ∗
j to Q, j = 1, .., M
7
Add bnew into mixture model.
8
Clear buffer Q
9 end
Computing the likelihood P(y|D, x):
We determine the in-distribution likelihood as P(y|D
=
I, x)
=
maxi b(i)(y|x), by considering the basis model with the highest likelihood for the sample. To approximate the
out-of-distribution likelihood P(y|D = O, x), we create a new basis bnew by adapting from the MAML prior θ∗using
recently observed data and use the likelihood bnew(y|x) under this model; the justiﬁcation for this approximation is that
if the data is OoD with respect to the current basis set, we need to ﬁt a new model to evaluate the likelihood.
Computing the prior P(D|x): To approximate the prior P(D|x), we create a normalized uncertainty score for each
basis and convert it into a probability-like measure. To create a normalized uncertainty score for the i-th basis, we
normalize the total variance of the ensemble by the variance of the components
scorei(x) =
M −1
M
P
j=1
(σ2
ij(x) + µ2
ij(x)) −µ2
i (x)
M −1
M
P
j=1
σ2
ij(x)
(8)
where µi(x) := M −1 PM
j=1 µij. Intuitively, this score normalizes the total uncertainty by the aleatoric or irreducible
uncertainty σ2
ij; so as the epistemic uncertainty reduces and µij →µi, ∀j (the models in the ensemble overlap), the
scorei →1. We convert the normalized score into a probability by exponential scaling, P(D = I|x) = e(1−score(x))/η
where η is a temperature parameter that modulates the sensitivity to the score (less sensitive as η increases). To be
conservative, we use the minimum score from all basis models for the SODDS calculation.
MoB maintains a buffer of OoD samples and instantiates a new basis when the buffer size exceeds a threshold. The
procedure to add a new basis is summarized in Algorithm 1 and is used by the ofﬂine and online algorithms summarized
in Algorithm 2 and 3.
4
Experiments
Our goal is to study the following three aspects of our proposed approach:
1. Performance: How does our approach compare in terms of average prediction error (MSE) over an online
stream of tasks?
5

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
Algorithm 2: Mixture of Basis (MoB) - Ofﬂine
1 Input: segmented data Dl = {D1
l , · · · , DS
l }; unsegmented data Du
2 Return: {b(i)
θ }, qφ, pθ, wθ, θ∗
3 Train meta-learned prior {θ∗
j }j=1:M using Dl
4 for i = 1:S do
5
Adapt b(i)
j
to Di
l from θ∗
j for j = 1, · · · , M
6 end
7 while Not converged do
8
Sample a minibatch of B trajectories from Du
9
for each τ = {x0:T , y0:T } in minibatch do
10
Init z0
11
for t=1:T do
12
Sample ϵt ∼N(0, I)
13
zt = µφ(zt−1, xt, yt) + σφ(zt−1, xt, yt) ⊙ϵt
14
Add new basis using ODDS(xt, yt)
15
end
16
Compute ˆL(τ; θ, φ) using Eq. (4)
17
end
18
Compute minibatch loss ˆLθ,φ = −PB
i=1 ˆL(τ (i); θ, φ)
19
Do gradient update: θ ←θ −∇θ ˆLθ,φ;
φ ←φ −∇φ ˆLθ,φ
20 end
Algorithm 3: Mixture of Basis (MoB) - Online
1 Input: online data stream τ
2 Init z0
3 for each time step t do
4
Sample ϵt, ˜ϵt ∼N(0, I)
5
Compute zt = µθ(zt−1) + σθ(zt−1) ⊙ϵt
6
Compute ˆyt using Eq.(6)
7
Update zt = µφ(zt, xt, yt) + σφ(zt, xt, yt) ⊙˜ϵt
8
Compute ˆL(τ1:t; θ, φ) by plugging into Eq.(4)
9
Do gradient update: θ ←θ −∇θ ˆLθ,φ;
φ ←φ −∇φ ˆLθ,φs
10
Add new basis using ODDS(xt, yt)
11 end
2. Scaling: How many basis models does our approach (MoB) instantiate?
3. Interpretability: Does the latent representation of the task (Z) reﬂect the similarity of tasks e.g. do the latent
representations for similar tasks cluster together? Are the task shifts reﬂected in shifts in the latent space?
We evaluate our method on a synthetic regression domain and on building environment models for HalfCheetah
(MuJoCo Qureshi et al. [2019]). 3 In both domains we deﬁne multiple tasks as described below. A subset of the tasks
are included in the segmented and unsegmented ofﬂine dataset (task partitions are described in supplementary). After
training on the ofﬂine dataset, all approaches are evaluated on an online data stream generated by a Markovian task
process with a ﬁxed, uniform probability per time step of switching to a different task. In particular, the online stream
contains tasks that were not present in the ofﬂine data set in order to test the ability of the approaches to adapt to new
tasks. For each domain and task partition, we report results on 10 different seeds.
Regression: We use randomly initialized neural networks to create 10 different regression tasks. The input observation
X is sampled uniformly at random in [−1, 1] and Y ∼N(µi(x); σi(x)) for the i-th task, where µi and σi are randomly
initialized networks. The advantage of creating regression tasks in this manner is that (a) the regression tasks are not
3Note that though the MuJoCo environment (HalfCheetah) is typically used in an reinforcement learning setting, here we are only
interested in a regression task constructed using this domain (i.e., the task of predicting the next state, given the current state and
action.)
6

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
(a) Regression. Marginal and joint probability density func-
tion estimates of variable y for each task in the synthetic
Regression domain. For clarity only one level set per task is
shown.
(b) HalfCheetah ice-slope, shown climbing a slope
Figure 5: Experiment domains.
overly simplistic, and (b) we can construct informative and well-understood dissimilarity measures (e.g. Kullback-
Leibler divergence, Bhattacharyya distance) between the conditional distributions P(Y |X) under different tasks to
quantify task similarity.
HalfCheetah foot: We create different tasks in the HalfCheetah environment by clipping the action space of one or two
actuators to one-third of the original. To generate the data under for different tasks, we rollout a policy trained in the
standard HalfCheetah environment (using SAC [Haarnoja et al., 2018]) under the different task settings. Speciﬁcally,
we clip the front foot(ff), front thigh(ft), back foot(bf), and back thigh(bt) to create 8 tasks - bt, ff, ftff, bfft, btff, btft,
bfff and btbf. We randomly pick two tasks to be included in the segmented ofﬂine data Dl and four tasks (including the
ones in Dl) to be included in the unsegmented ofﬂine data set Du. All tasks are included in the online data stream.
HalfCheetah ice-slope: We create another set of tasks using the HalfCheetah environment by changing the slopes
and friction of the terrain. We create 4 different tasks for the ofﬂine training: 1) ﬂat terrain with low friction / ice, 2)
medium slope - medium slope with normal friction, 3) mixed (easy, medium, and hard) slopes with normal friction,
and 4) medium slope with ice terrain. The data generation process is similar to the HalfCheetah foot. We randomly
pick two tasks for the segmented ofﬂine dataset Dl and an additional two tasks for unsegmented ofﬂine dataset Du (see
supplementary for details). During the online phase, we always test our method in a low friction terrain with different
slopes (mixed ice) which was never seen during ofﬂine training. 4
We compare our method with three baselines - all of which use a meta-learned prior [Finn et al., 2017] trained using
ofﬂine data:
• MOLe: MOLe [Nagabandi et al., 2019] is an online algorithm that instantiates multiple task models from a
meta-learned prior. We add an ofﬂine training phase to MOLe for fair comparison by running MOLe on each
trajectory in the ofﬂine data and carrying over any generated models.
• MAML k-shot: This approach uses a single prediction model that is adapted from MAML prior θ∗using
latest k data points.
• MAML continuous: This approach uses a single prediction model that is initialized using a meta-learned
prior θ∗(learned using ofﬂine data). At each time step, the current model is updated using the most recent
observations.
4The construction of tasks here is limited by the technical difﬁculty of not being able to switch the friction easily for a Mujoco
environment within a single rollout.
7

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
While MAML k-shot and continuous optimize for adaptation to the most recent task, MOLe also tries to optimize recall
of previous tasks by maintaining multiple task models. These baselines provide a useful contrast against our approach
which also tries to achieve adaptation to new tasks by reusing previously learned basis models.
Figure 6: MSEs and 95% conﬁdence intervals over 10 seeds for each algorithm on each task partition.
Performance and Scaling: MoB achieves the lowest mean squared-error (MSE) on the online stream of tasks, in most
task partitions and across domains. On both the regression task and HalfCheetah ice-slope, MoB achieves signiﬁcantly
better performance than all baselines while instantiating signiﬁcantly fewer models than MOLe. For example, in the
HalfCheetah ice-slope domain, MoB instantiates 13, 15 and 2 basis models (on average) in the three task partitions,
in comparison to the 26, 53 and 9 task models instantiated by MOLe. In the regression domain, MoB instantiates 3
models vs. MOLe’s average of 12 (details in Table 1). This demonstrates MoB’s ability to reuse previously learned
basis models in order to achieve comparable or superior performance.
In HalfCheetah foot, MoB only outperforms MOLe in the ﬁrst task partition which contains segmented tasks clipping
only one actuator; the other two have the segmented tasks clipping two actuators. To some degree, the ﬁrst task partition
provides more ’primitive’ segmented tasks in the ofﬂine training phase. This opens up the interesting question and
direction of whether we could design a curriculum of primitive tasks during ofﬂine training for MoB to enable better
adaptation in the online phase.
Interpretability: We analyzed the principal components of the Zt inferred by MoB to study whether similar tasks
cluster together in latent space. In the regression domain, we can quantify the task similarity by the Bhattacharya
distance between the distribution of Y under different tasks. As we can see in Fig. 7, latent task representations are
well separated if tasks are sufﬁciently different and overlap more as the similarity increases. We also conﬁrmed that
the trajectories of the Z-components with the highest variance typically show shifts that are aligned with the task
boundaries if the tasks are dissimilar (see Fig. 10; additional plots can be found in the supplementary material).
5
Related Work
Regularization and rehearsal based approaches to continual learning [Maltoni and Lomonaco, 2018] typically use
a single network and employ strategies to prevent catastrophic forgetting of previously learned tasks. Architectural
approaches such as Rusu et al. [2016] instantiate a new networks for each task but scale poorly with the number of tasks
and are not applicable in task-agnostic settings.
Table 1: Average number of basis (task) models instantiated over 10 different seeds per partition.
Domain
Partition
MoB
MOLe
1
3.4
12.0
Regression
2
3.6
11.8
3
3.3
11.6
1
3.0
2.3
HalfCheetah foot
2
3.0
3.9
3
3.0
3.4
1
13.4
26.5
HalfCheetah ice-Slope
2
14.8
52.8
3
2.0
9.2
8

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
Figure 7: Regression. First two principal components of the 32-dimensional latent space Z. Bhattacharyya distance
between tasks is above each subplot; plots are ordered in terms of decreasing distance (increasing task similarity) to a
reference task 9 shown in blue.
Figure 8: Half-cheetah foot. First two principal components of the 32-dimensional latent space Z. The tasks ff and bt
(top plot) are largely separated in the principal component space, while the tasks ff and ftff overlap with each other,
likely because the front foot ff is clipped in both.
Figure 9: Regression. Activations of a randomly selected z component (z15) over a randomly selected trajectory. Mean
values of task segments are shown in red. The activations of all other 31 z components is shown in Appendix.
9

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
Figure 10: HalfCheetah Foot. z component with maximum variance (mean values in red). When the task switches
from btff to bfff, the activation doesn’t change much, likely because ff is present in both. However, it shifts signiﬁcantly
when the task changes to back.
Recent works in continual learning [Finn et al., 2019, Caccia et al., 2020, Gupta et al., 2020], leverage advances in
meta-learning (e.g. MAML [Finn et al., 2017]) to enable fast adaptation to the current task, instead of attempting to
strictly remember previous tasks with no adaptation. However, these approaches don’t allow for modularization and
interpretability. A handful of works have proposed ways to combine model components that are different from our
approach. He et al. [2019] combines model components in parameter space whereas Jerfel et al. [2018] proposes an
approach where the MAML prior itself is modeled as a mixture distribution. MOLe [Nagabandi et al., 2019], similar to
our approach, creates multiple prediction models by leveraging MAML and is hence used as a baseline for comparison.
In MoB, we try to strike a balance between adaptability and interpretability by leveraging MAML for fast instantiation
of basis models. Our approach of separating the task-speciﬁc and task-agnostic model components is similar to the
"what and how" framework proposed in He et al. [2019], and indeed can be thought of as a speciﬁc implementation.
Several methods to detect OoD samples have been proposed in the context of classiﬁcation tasks - Hendrycks and
Gimpel [2016] take the maximum of softmax probability as the conﬁdence score to detect OoD samples while Lee
et al. [2018] deﬁne the score based on the Mahalanobis distance; Hendrycks et al. [2018] and Roy et al. [2021] assume
the models have access to a large data set of known outliers. He et al. [2019] focus on a regression setting and use
prediction errors with set thresholds to detect novel samples. In contrast, we cast the detection problem as a binary
decision and handle combinations of shifts in P(X) and P(Y |X) by jointly considering the model uncertainty and
likelihood.
6
Conclusions
We propose a new approach, Mixture of Basis (MoB), that can learn robustly in the presence of distribution shifts. Our
approach learns a set of basis models and constructs a dynamic, task-dependent mixture of the existing basis models to
predict for the current task. We also introduce a new methodology (ODDS) to instantiate new basis models which takes
into account both the uncertainty of the existing models before the ground truth is observed, as well as the likelihood of
the ground truth after it is observed. We show in our experiments that MoB is able to perform better than comparable
methods like MOLe in most cases, while instantiating signiﬁcantly fewer models. Moreover, our analysis of the latent
task representations learned by MoB indicate that it learns interpretable task representations - we show that similar
tasks cluster together in the latent space and that the latent representation shifts at task boundaries when the tasks are
dissimilar. Thus, our proposed approach learns meaningful task representations while achieving good performance and
scaling
Disclaimer
This paper was prepared for informational purposes by the Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research group of
JPMorgan Chase & Co˙and its afﬁliates (“JP Morgan”), and is not a product of the Research Department of JP Morgan.
JP Morgan makes no representation and warranty whatsoever and disclaims all liability, for the completeness, accuracy
or reliability of the information contained herein. This document is not intended as investment research or investment
advice, or a recommendation, offer or solicitation for the purchase or sale of any security, ﬁnancial instrument, ﬁnancial
product or service, or to be used in any way for evaluating the merits of participating in any transaction, and shall not
10

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
constitute a solicitation under any jurisdiction or to any person, if such solicitation under such jurisdiction or to such
person would be unlawful.
