Cooperative  Automated  worm Response and 
Detection  ImmuNe ALgorithm(CARDINAL) 
inspired by T-cell Immunity  and Tolerance 
 
 
Jungwon Kim*, William O. Wilson† , Uwe Aickelin†  and Julie McLeod‡ 
 
*Department of Computer Science, University College London,  UK 

†School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, UK 

‡Faculty of Applied  Science, University of the West England, UK 

 
 
 
Abstract. The  role of T-cells  within the immune  system is to confirm 
and  assess  anomalous situations  and  then either  respond  to or tolerate 
the source of the effect. To illustrate how these mechanisms can be har- 
nessed to solve real-world problems, we present the blueprint of a T-cell 
inspired  algorithm for computer security worm detection. We show how 
the three central T-cell  processes,  namely  T-cell  maturation, differen- 
tiation and  proliferation, naturally  map  into this domain   and  further 
illustrate how  such  an  algorithm fits  into a complete immune  inspired 
computer security system and  framework. 
 
 
1 Introduction 
 
Self-propogating  malicious  code represents  a significant  threat in recent  times 
as the ability of these programs  to spread  and infect systems has increased  dra- 
matically. The recent SQL Slammer worm infected more than 90% of vulnerable 
hosts on the Internet within 10 minutes  [10], and at its peak the Code-Red worm 
infected  over 2,000 hosts every minute  [11]. Under  such a constantly hostile en- 
vironment, the traditional manual  patching approach to protecting systems is 
clearly not effective. 
An alternative  solution  to this  problem  is to have  an  automated  detection 
and  response  system  which could identify  malicious  self propogation  and  stop 
the spread  of the worm as early  as possible. Current automated detection and 
response systems involve such actions  as blocking unsecure  ports, dropping  po- 

breaking  communication between  infected  and non-infected  hosts to slow down 
worm propagation and minimise potential damage [12]. This appears  to be a sim- 
ple and  obvious  solution,  however  there are a number  of significant hurdles  to 
overcome in order to employ such automated responders.  The most noteworthy 
obstacle is the high false positive error problem  [16]. If an automated responder 
disconnects  communication  between  two  hosts  based  on a false positive  result, 

 
 
 
 
the effect of this inappropriate disconnection  could be as bad, if not worse than, 
the damage  caused by the worm itself. 
The  objective  of this paper  is to propose a solution  to this problem  by tak- 
ing inspiration from the Human  Immune  System (HIS).  Previous  research  into 
computer  security in the context of Artificial Immune Systems (AIS) has been fo- 
cused on detecting unknown  intrusions [2] [8]; detecting anomalous  events such 
as  abnormal   network  traffic patterns or  abnormal   sequences  of system calls. 
However the reliability  of these  systems  to handle  non  trivial  problems  is still 
in question as they have not yet passed tests to indicate that low false positives 
are achievable  in a real environment [2] [8]. 
Instead of developing these existing AIS, we propose a novel AIS model that 
adopts  numerous  mechanisms  inspired  from the differentiation states of T cells. 
These differentiation states can be grouped  into particular status subsets  which 
can be used to classify the types of T cell. From these classifications, the various 
roles of the diverse  T  cell types  can  be seen in terms  of their  contribution  to 
the unique  aspects  of overall  immunity and  tolerance within the HIS. In  this 
paper we carefully study the significant properties and physiological mechanisms 
of each  T  cell subset,  with  regard  to the way  they  influence  the interaction 
of immunity and  tolerance. This  study allows us to design  a new AIS model, 
CARDINAL(Cooperative Automated worm  Response  and  Detection  ImmuNe 
ALgorithm) which has the potential to operate as a cooperative automated worm 
detection and response system. The paper starts by addressing the research issues 
associated with such a system. Section 3 introduces the different differentiation 
states of T cells within the HIS. Section 4 presents a novel cooperative automated 
worm detection and response system which adopts  CARDINAL  and finally the 
paper  concludes with details  of future  work planned. 
 
 
2 Cooperative  Automated  Worm Detection  and 
Responses 
 
In order to detect  the presense of a novel worm virus various automated anomaly 
detection and  response based  systems have been developed  [12]. These systems 
trigger  automated  responses  when they  observe  such things  as abnormal  rates 

the false positive error  rate made  by  local  anomaly  detectors, an  alternative 
cooperative strategy has also been suggested [3] [13] [14]. The motivation behind 
this approach is that additional information on the infectious status of the worm, 
and the responding  states of other peer hosts, would help local responders  make 
better decisions  by  taking into account the collective  evidence  on an  attack’s 
severity and  certainty, and  an  infection  growth rate. Indeed,  some  work  has 
already  reported that such a suggestion reduces false positive errors [16]. 
However,  there  are  some significant  issues to be tackled  in order  to make 
a cooperative strategy truly effective. Firstly, information shared  between  peer 
hosts should be lightweight, as the transfer of unnecessary  and excessive informa- 
tion can create the potential for self denial-of-service  attacks [3] [13]. Secondly 

 
 
 
 
response  mechanisms  should  be robust against inaccurate information passed 
amoung  hosts  [3]. If the reaction  to a false positive  error  is isolated  to a sin- 
gle host,  the impact  is minimal.  However because  of the cooperative  nature of 
the system, this inappropriate response could be disseminated to the rest of the 
network,  causing  other hosts to react  in a similar  fashion  and  exascerbate the 
problem.  Thus,  a cooperative  system  needs  to localise the negative  impact  of 
such errors,  and  this could be done by constantly redefining the range  of infor- 
mation to be shared  in terms of an estimated certainty of detection results. In 
order to address  these issues, we identify the following to be studied: 
 
–  Optimise the number of  peer  hosts  polled: the CARDINAL  system 
needs  to determine which  peer  hosts  are  able  to share  information,  and 
how many  peer  hosts should  be selected  to share  that information. These 
decisions are directly  aimed at preventing a possible break  of self denial-of- 
service attack. Determining the set of peer hosts is done by identifying all the 
possible peer hosts that can be directly contacted and thus infected by a given 
host.  However, the number  of all possible peer hosts  may  be unnecessarily 
large  as  information shared  by  a  smaller  number  of peer  hosts might be 
sufficient  to mitigate  and  stop  worm  propagation.  An  optimal  number  of 
peer hosts is desirable  to mitigate the propogation of a worm to a sufficient 
degree whilst minimising the number of resources that are required to achieve 
that objective. The determination of the size of this optimal  set of peer hosts 
would be influenced by factors such as the severity of the worm’s threat, the 
certainty of attack detection, and the growth rate of the infection. The more 
severe an attack, the more certain we are of it being detected, or the faster 
is its  propagation,  then the larger  the peer set  needs to be so information 
can be shared  by more peer hosts to counterattack the worm successfully. 
–  Types of system responses should be determined by attack sever- 
ity and certainty: in order to reduce the negative effects of false detection 
results, CARDINAL  selects its response to the threat depending  on the cer- 
tainty of an attack being detected and  the severity of that attack. CARDI- 
NAL would respond  to severe and certain attacks with strong actions,  such 
as blocking ports showing anomalous  outbound connection  patterns, elimi- 

containing attack signatures. Alternatively, when presented with relatively 
uncertain or less severe attacks, CARDINAL  would take less severe action, 
such as logging the potential situation for an administrator or limiting the 
network  connection  rates. 
–  For performing adequate magnitudes of responses, both local and 
peer information needs to be taken into account: the severity and 
certainty of attacks should not be staticly measured.  A worm detected at a 
local host, at a given time, might appear  to be relatively less severe, however 
if CARDINAL  later observes that the number  of peer hosts infected  by the 
worm greatly increases  within a short time frame,  responses  to this worm 
should  be upregulated  in terms  of detection certainty  and  attack severity. 
The  total number  of infected  peer  hosts  could  be estimated  based  on the 

 
 
 
 
collective  information passed  between  the peer  set.  Alternatively, when  a 
severe attack is detected by a particular host, which disseminates this infor- 
mation to the remaining designated peer hosts, those hosts do not necessarily 
have to take the same corrective  action  as the original host. If the infectious 
symptoms  are not shown at the peer hosts  receiving this  information,  and 
the total number  of infected  peer hosts does not increase  quickly,  the peer 
host  can change  its  response  from a very strong  reaction  to a weaker  one. 
In turn this  host  would decrease  the number  of other  peer  hosts  to which 
it  sends  its  detection and  response  information,  curtailing  the response  to 
the worm and  returing the system to a stable state. Considering  these fac- 
tors together, we see CARDINAL  will determine the apppropriate number 
of hosts to be polled and the degree of response to a worm according  to the 
severity and certainty of attacks, which are dynamically  measured  based on 
both local and peer information. 
 
 
 
CARDINAL
HIS
Optimise the number of peer hosts polled Dynamically adjust the proliferation rate 
for each effector T cell 
Types  of system  responses should be de-
termined by attack severity and  certainty
Differentiate appropriate types  of effector 
T  cells depending on interaction with cy-
tokines and other  molecules during  the
maturation proccess 
For performing adequate magnitudes of re-
ponses,  both   local  and  peer  information 
needs to be taken into account 
T cell effector function is amplified   and 
suppressed via interaction among  different 
types of effector T cells 
 
Table 1. Mapping between CARDINAL and  HIS 
 
 
 
We believe that several mechanisms  constituting T cell immunity and toler- 
ance of the HIS could provide insight into intelligent approaches to implementing 
the previous three properties. Table  1 shows these three specific properties of T 
cells in the HIS, which were used to design CARDINAL.  Section 4 discusses the 
details of these properties together with the proposed model of CARDINAL.  Be- 
fore this discussion, section 3 briefly reviews the various differentiation states of 
T cells and how they contribute to the HIS in balancing  immunity and tolerance. 
 
 
3 T-cell Immunity  and Tolerance of HIS 
 
The immune response is an incredibly complex process that one can argue begins 
with the dendritic cell (DC).  DC’s are  a class of antigen presenting cell that 
migrate to tissue in order to ingest antigen or protein fragments. Whilst ingesting 
the antigen, DC’s are also receptive to molecules in the environment that may be 

 
 
 
 
associated  with  the circumstances  of that antigen’s  existence.  These  molecules 
are identified as a form of danger  signal  [9]. Once the antigen has been ingested 
in the tissue, the DC’s travel back to the lymph  nodes where they present the 
antigen peptides  to naive or memory T cells via their MHC molecules, this allows 
a T cell to be able to identify  that antigen.  In addition,  the DC will interpret 
the molecules it experienced  during  the ingestion process, and release particular 
cytokines1  to influence the differentiation  of the T cell it  is presenting  antigen 
to. In this way, the DC drives the T cell to react to the antigen in an appropriate 
manner  and  as such the DC can be seen as the interpretative brain  behind  the 
immune  response.  Given  we now  know  what drives  the T  cell differentiation 
process,  we turn to look at the different  T  cell differentiation  stages.  Much  of 
this information  has been taken from [5] [7] and  reference to that work should 
be made if further detail  is required. 
 
 
3.1 Naive T cells 
 
Naive  T  cells are  T  cells that have  survived  the negative  and  positive  selec- 
tion processes within the thymus, and  have  migrated to continuously circulate 
between  the blood and  lymphoid  organs  as they await antigen presentation by 
DC’s. The important fact is that naive T cells have not experienced  antigen and 
they do not as yet exhibit effector function. 
 
 
3.2 Activated T cells 
 
Naive T cells reach an activated state when the T cell receptor (TCR) on the sur- 
face of the naive T cell successfully binds to the antigen peptide-MHC molecules 
on the surface of the DC, and  co-stimulatory molecules are sufficiently upregu- 
lated on the surface of the DC to reflect the potential danger  signal. The degree 
of signaling from the DC influences the degree of activation of the T cells. T cells 
that receive high signal strengths  adopt  the potential  for effector function  and 
gain the ability to migrate from their current location in the lymph node to the 
periphery. These activated T cells gain the ability to proliferate and their clones 
will begin to differentiate  into  either  helper  T cells or cytotoxic  T cells. These 
cells will finally reach  effector status when they interact with a second antigen 
source. T cells that receive excessive levels of signalling die through a process of 
activation induced  cell death (AICD)  to prevent an excessive immune  response 
taking place. 
 
 
3.3 Helper T cells  (Th) 
 
Naive T cells express either CD4 or CD8 co-receptor  molecules on their surface, 
so called as they  are clustered  with  the TCR  and  bind  to the MHC molecules 
 
1  Cytokines are  chemical  messengers  within the HIS [5]. They  are  proteins produced 
by  virtually all cells in the HIS and  they play  an  important role in regulating the 
development of effector immune  cells 

 
 
 
 
presented  on the DC.  Naive T  cells expressing  CD4 differentiate  into  Th  cells 
after activation. When  they achieve  effector status, through further antigenic 
stimulation, Th  cells can develop into either Th1  or Th2  cells. The  divergence 
between Th1 and Th2 is driven by the cytokines released from the DC when the 
T cell is first  activated.  Th1  and  Th2  cells have  different  functionality  as Th1 
cells release  cytokines that activate cytotoxic T  cells whilst Th2  cells release 
cytokines that activate B cells. 
In addition, a cross regulation mechanism  exists between Th1 and Th2 cells. 
Cytokines released  by Th1  cells directly  impede  the proliferation of Th2  cells, 
whilst Th1 cytokines downregulate the production of the cytokine IL-12 in DC’s 
which in turn downregulates the proliferation of Th2 cells. This feedback mech- 
anism leads to an immune response dominated by the particular Th cell subtype 
that is primarily   stimulated, ensuring  the more  suitable immune  response  is 
initiated to resolve the current threat. 
 
 
3.4 Cytotoxic T cells  (CTL) 
 
Naive cells that express  the CD8 molecule on their surface  are  predestined to 
become CTL  cells after activation. If the DC’s themselves do not express suffi- 
cient co-stimulatory molecules to cause activation, then DC’s can be induced  to 
upregulate those signals by Th1 cells who also bind to the DC. Activated CTL’s 
will undergo proliferation and migrate to inflamed peripheral tissues. When they 
receive stimulation  from subsequent  antigen,  they  will reach  an effector status 
and  develop the ability to produce  antiviral cytokines and  cytotoxic molecules, 
which when released  will kill infected  host cells that exhibit the antigen trace 
identified by the CTL.  A CTL  can  bind  to, and  therefore kill, more than one 
infected  cell at a time. 
Current theories disagree as to whether,  after reaching  an effector state and 
carrying  out their helper or killer function,  CTL and Th cells either die as they 
have reached a terminally differentiated state or whether  some proportion of the 
CTL / Th effector cell population differentiate into longer lived memory cells to 
facilitate a suitable secondary  response. 
 
 
3.5 Summary of T cell  states 
 
From  the above  sections,  we can see that given the presentation  of antigen  by 
an  APC  and  the existence of sufficient signals  that indicate the presence  of 
danger,  a naive cell will become activated, will proliferate and differentiate into 
effector cells which can take on numerous  alternative states. Depending  on the 
co-receptors  expressed on the effector T cell surface, these cells will either differ- 
entiate into Th or CTL cells. CTL cells lead the immune response by eliminating 
antigenic threats. Th cells provide  assistance to this protective process but  also 
provide  regulation via a comprehensive  feedback  mechanism  to ensure  stabili- 
sation. Naive cells that do not receive sufficient danger  signals do not become 
activated and so the system becomes tolerant to such antigen strains. All these 

 
 
 
 
cells interact in a competitive environment that results in tolerance and immu- 
nity within the system. 
 
 
4 Cooperative Automated worm Response and Detection 
ImmuNe ALgorithm(CARDINAL) 
 
As described  in the previous  section,  different differentiation statuses of T-cells 
play varying roles in evoking overall immunity and tolerance in the HIS. This sec- 
tion introduces the overall architecture and components of the AIS that adopts 
CARDINAL,  which employs various the T-cell immunity and tolerance mechan- 
ims reviewed in the previous  section. 
 
 
4.1 Overall Architecture 
 
 
 
Host 1  
Host 2  
 
Worm  
 
Periphery  
 
Periphery  
 
Worm  
Safe data  
Safe data  
DCs  
T cells  
DCs  
T cells  
 
Lymph Node  
 
T cells  
 
Lymph Node  
 
 
Worm    Safe data  
 
T cells  
Periphery  
T cells  
 
DCs  
 
T cells  
 
Lymph Node  
 
Host 3  
 
 
Fig. 1. Overview  Architecture of CARDINAL. 
 
 
 
The overall architecture of CARDINAL  is presented in Fig. 1. It consists of 
periphery  and lymph node processes [15]. Both processes reside on a monitoring 
host and  any  host running  these two processes  becomes a part of an  artificial 
body which CARDINAL  monitors. The periphery  is comprised  of DCs and var- 
ious types of artificial T cells and they directly  interact with input  data such as 

also exists  as a part of the periphery. DCs gather  and  analyse  the input  data 
and  carry  their  analysis  results  to the lymph  node.  At the lymph  node,  naive 
T cells are created which subsequently differentiate into various  types of effec- 
tor  T  cells based  on the input  data analysis  results continuously passed  from 
DCs. Within CARDINAL,  effector T cells are automated responders  that react 
to worm  related  processes  in the periphery. Effector  T  cells are  assigned  to a 
response  target, a response  type,  and  the number  of peer hosts  polled.  Before 

 
9  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Worm 
Safe 
Data 
Host 1 
Periphery 
 
Tissue 
 
8 
 
 
Antigens 
 
2 
 
 
Danger 
Signals 
 
1       8 
 
 
1. DCs sense danger signals 
 
2. DCs capture antigens 
Local 
CTLs 
Local 
DCs  
Th2 Cells 
 
3. Naive T cell creation 
Lymph Node 
 
7 
 
4 
 
 
DCs 
3 
7 
Naive 
T cells 
4 
4 
 
3. Naive T cell maturation 
 
4. Effector T cell differentiation 
Local 
CTLs 
Local 
6       Th 1 Cells 
Local 
Th 2 Cells 
5. Interaction between local effector T cells 
and peer effector T cells 
5 
Peer 
 
Peer 
5 
5 
Peer 
CTLs 
Th1 Cells 
Th2 Cells 
6. Interaction between updated local CTLs 
and updated local Th1 cells 
Interaction  
Differentiation 
Peer CTLs 
Peer Th1 cells 
Peer Th2 cells 
Peer CTLs 
7    Peer Th1 cells 
Peer Th2 cells 
 
7. Effector T cell Migration 
Host 2 
Host 3 
 
Fig. 2. Periphery and  Lymph  Node  Processes  in 
CARDINAL 
 
8. Effector T cell response 
 
 
Fig. 3. A flow chart of CARDINAL 
 
 
the effector T cells migrate  from the lymph  node to the periphery, they  inter- 
act  with other effector T  cells passed  from peer  hosts. This  interaction allows 
locally generated effector T cells to determine whether  they should perform  as- 
signed  types  of responses  or not,  and  the numbers  of peer  hosts  to be polled 
if they decide  a response  is appropriate. The  local effector T  cells assigned  to 
particular  responses,  and  the number  of peer hosts  to be polled are  passed  to 
the periphery  processes at the local host  and  the peer hosts.  These  effector T 
cells now respond to the response targets, which are also defined as a part of the 
periphery  process. In the next section,  we provide  more detailed  descriptions of 
artificial cell interactions occuring  at the periphery  and  lymph  node processes 
within CARDINAL. 
 
 
4.2 Periphery and Lymph Node Processes 
 
DCs sense danger signals and capture antigens The artificial tissue layer 
provides the location for two primary  activities, the monitoring of danger signals 
(see 01 in Fig. 2) and the collection of antigen in the form of input  data (see 02 
in Fig. 2). Here danger  signals are seen in the context of the symptoms  arising 
from a worms  infection.  Well known  worm  infection  symptoms  include  exces- 
sive cpu load at the host level, bandwidth saturation at the network  level, and 

symptoms  into  danger  signals  that can  be acted  upon  can  be seen in [6] and 
are not discussed  here. The  DC’s within CARDINAL  then assess these danger 
signals and ascertain the severity of the attack and the certainty of its detection. 
The  second purpose  of the tissue layer is to provide  a mechanism  for the DC’s 
to gain access to the input  data reflecting the antigens, so that the threat level 
derived  from the danger  signal can be associated with its respective  source and 

 
 
 
 
remembered. The  extraction  of antigen  from the tissues  by  DC’s  is discussed 
in [4] [6]. 
 
 
Naive T cell  creation Once collected in the periphery, DCs carry  the danger 
signal assessment results and captured antigens to the lymph node. At the lymph 
node, naive T cells are created and these are subsequently differentiated based on 
the danger  signal assessment results into their various  states (see 03 in Fig. 2). 
In  nature, the receptors  on naive  T  cells (TCR’s) allow the cell to identify a 
particular  type  of antigen.  For  the sake of simplicity,  our  model assumes  that 
the system will target the worm which always has a consistent attack signature 
and so can be detected by our naive T cells via these receptors.  This assumption 
will be changed  in future  work to allow for the detection of polymorphic  worms, 
which constantly  change  their  form or functionality.  In this  way, the receptors 
of the naive T cells are simply copies of the antigens presented by DCs. 
 
 
Naive T cell  maturation Naive T cells continuously  encounter  DCs passed 
from the periphery  (see 03 in Fig. 2). During  this process, DCs present danger 
signal  assessment results to the naive  T  cells in  three forms,  as  a  form  of a 
costimulatory signal  and  as  two types of cytokines  that reflect  the potential 
danger  signal, and  each is affected differently based  on the scale of the attack. 
The  costimulatory  signal is increased  if a DC detects  a severe attack, needing 
a strong response,  and  the certainty of that attack is assessed to be high. The 
cytokine IL-12 increases  when a DC detects  a severe attack requiring  a strong 
response but  with a relatively lower certainty, whereas the value of the cytokine 
IL-4 is incremented when a DC detects  a less severe attack which only needs a 
weak response2 . 
Naive T cells have three numerical  values associated with them, these repre- 
sent the “accumulated” certainties and  severities of attacks recognised for each 
cell type: CTL activation values, Th1 activation values, and Th2 activation val- 
ues. Whenever naive T cells interact with DCs, they evaluate whether the antigen 
presented by DCs are identical to their TCRs.  If they are identical, naive T cells 
adjust these three activation values  by  taking account into the values  of the 
costimulatory  signals and  the cytokines  IL-12 and  IL-4 produced  by the DC’s 
(see 03 in Fig.  2). The  costimulatory  signal  will influence the CTL  activation 
value  whilst IL-12 and  IL-4 will influence  the Th1  and  Th2  activation values 
respectively.  After a suitable period  of time, these naive T cells are considered 
as ready  to respond  and differentiate. 
 
 
Effector T Cell differentiation There are three different types of local effector 
T cells : local CTL,  local Th1,  and  local Th2 cells (see 04 in Fig. 2). The  CTL 
activation , Th1 activation and Th2 activation values associated with the naive 
 
2  For a less severe attack, CARDINAL does not take into account the certainty of this 
kind of attack since a negative effect of a response  triggered by a false positive error 
would be minor. 

 
 
 
 
T cells will determine the types  of local effector T cells that naive  T cells will 
differentiate into. When one of these activation values exceeds a given threshold, 
via stimulation from the costimulatory molecules or cytokines from DCs, naive 
T cells will differentiate into the respective  type of cell for which the threshold 
was exceeded. The newly differentiated local effector T cell will have an identical 
TCR  pattern to the orginal  naive T cell. In addition, they are cloned, and  the 
number  of clones  reflects the numbers  of polled peer hosts. This  clonal rate is 
determined by the CTL, the Th1, and the Th2 activation values respectively.  The 
larger the CTL  activation value, the larger is the number  of clones allocated to 
that CTL.  Similarly,  the larger the Th1 or Th2 cell activation values, the larger 
is the numbers  of clones assigned to the Th1 cell or Th2 cell. 
 
 
Interaction between  local effector  cells   and peer effector cells   Each 
type  of local effector  T  cell only  interacts  with  the same  corresponding  type 
of peer  effector T  cell transferred  from the peer  hosts  (see 05 in Fig.  2). This 
interaction takes place over four distinct stages. During the initial stage, at each 
host, CARDINAL  selects local effector T cells whose numbers  of clones are large 
enough to indicate that the antigens recognised by those effectors are severe in 
terms  of their  attack, and  that the evidence  of this  attack is certain.  During 
the second stage, CARDINAL  reviews the local effector T  cells that were not 
selected  during  the first stage and  compares  them to the peer effector T cells. 
Local  effector  T  cells are  then chosen  if they  match  the required  number  of 
peer effector T cells, which detect  the same antigens recognisied by local effector 
T cells. During  the third stage, CARDINAL  recalculates the number  of clones 
assigned  to the local effector T  cells that were selected  during  stages  one and 
two. The numbers  of clones produced  is determined by comparing  the historical 
growth rate of the worm infection against the historical effector cell clone growth 
rate3 . If the worm infection growth rate exceeds, or is equal to, the clone growth 
rate, CARDINAL  increases  the numbers  of clones currently assigned  to local 
effector T cells, otherwise CARDINAL  decreases the numbers  of clones of local 
effector T cells. 
During  the fourth  and  final stage,  CARDINAL  reviews the peer effector T 
cells received by the local host and identifies those cells that do not have a local 
effector T cell that are capable  of detecting the same antigen. The  numbers  of 
clones assigned  to these peer  effector T  cells is then decreased  because  those 
antigen  have  not been detected at this  local host,  and  so are not considered  a 
threat. Therefore,  CARDINAL  starts to suppress  the response to that antigen. 
After this suppression,  CARDINAL  examines the the number  of clones assigned 
to the peer effector T cells sent to the local host. If the number  of clones exceeds 
zero, then this reflects a potential threat that the local host has yet to experience. 
In order  to prepare  the local host  for this  potential  threat the local host  will 
 
3  The  worm  infection growth rate is estimated from  the total number of responses 
which  the peer  hosts  made  during  the previous  two  time  steps.  The  clone  growth 
rate is also measured as the change  in the number of clones over  the previous  two 
time steps. 

 
 
 
 
create a local naive T cell that is an exact copy of a peer effector T cell. This naive 
cell will have  lower activation thresholds for its CTL,  Th1  and  Th2  activation 
values to ensure a rapid response is initiated to any subsequent antigen exposure. 
In this way, we create a form of memory  within the CARDINAL  system. 
 
Interaction between  updated local CTLs and updated local Th1 cells 
Up to this point, effector T cells have only interacted with other effector T cells 
of the same type. However, CARDINAL  also incorporates interactions amongst 
different types of effector cells. Before local effector T cells migrate to the pe- 
riphery,  another  interaction  between  local CTLs  and  local Th1  cells occurs at 
the lymph node. During this interaction, the local Th1 cells can further increase 
the number  of clones assigned to local CTL’s if the two cells recognise the same 
antigen (see 06 in Fig. 2). As the certainty of an attack detected by a local Th1 
cell is lower compared  to that detected by a CTL, some fraction of the number  of 
clones which a local Th1 cell has could be added  to the number  of clones of the 
local CTL. This variation in attack certainty between CTL’s and Th1’s depends 
on the type and timing of the danger  signals’ occurrence  (infection  symptoms). 
The interaction between  a local Th1 and a local CTL would result in the fusion 
of various  information related to an antigen, which is collected from diverse in- 
put  sources  over different time steps. This  additional support from a Th1  cell 
reinforces the response  of a CTL  by increasing  the number  of CTL  clones spe- 
cific to that antigen. This is because they provide  additional evidence as to the 
existence of an antigen threat. 
 
Effector T cell  migration and response After  the cell interaction  phase 
is complete,  local and  peer  effector T  cells with positive clone values  begin  a 
migration process either to respond  to a threat in the periphery  at a local level 
(see 07 08   in Fig.  2) or communicate  the existence  of such  a threat to other 
peer  hosts  (see 07 in Fig.  2).  Local CTLs  and  local Th2  cells migrate  to the 
periphery  of the local host and commence their assigned response roles to counter 
the antigen attack. Th1  cells influence the number  of CTL  clones whilst in the 
lymph  node,  so their impact  on  the periphery   is indirect.   If the numbers  of 
clones assigned  to local effectors are  positive, and  there are  no matching peer 
effector cells detecting identical antigens, CARDINAL  creates new peer effectors 
which are copies of the local effectors. These new peer effector T cells, along with 
the existing peer effector T cells, migrate to other peer hosts if the number  of 
clones associated  with  these  cells is positive.  This  ensures  that the knowledge 
of the antigen attack is communicated to the selected  peer hosts. As described 
previously,  the number  of peer hosts selected for migration is determined by the 
severity and  certainty of an attack. The  actual  hosts chosen for this migration 
subset  are selected randomly  from “all the possible peer hosts”. 
 
4.3 T cell  Immunity  and Tolerance within CARDINAL 
As illustrated in previous sections, CARDINAL  adopts  various immune inspired 
components  in order  to implement  an  effective cooperative  strategy  for worm 

 
 
 
 
CARDINAL 
Components 
 
Roles 
CARDINAL
Components 
Roles 
Periphery 
Input data access and re- 
ponding  targets 
Lymph  Node
T  cell creation, differen- 
tiation and  interaction 
Tissue 
Local anomaly detectors DC
Costimula-
tory Signals 
Frequencies of severe and 
certain attacks 
DC  
Cytokine 
IL12 
Frequencies of severe and
less certain attacks 
DC Cytokine IL4 Frequencies of less severe 
attacks 
Danger  Signals 
Infection symptoms
Antigens
Attack Signatures 
TCRs 
Attack signatures
CTLs
Strong  Automated   Re- 
sponders 
Th1  Cells 
CTL  controller
Th2 Cells
Weak   Automated    Re- 
sponders 
Activation Values 
of a Naive T cell 
Accumulated
severities
and certainties of attacks
Number of clones
of  an  Effector  T
cell 
Number of  polling  peer 
hosts 
 
Table 2. CARDINAL components and  their roles 
 
 
 
detection and  response.  Table  2 summarises  these components and  their roles 
within  CARDINAL.  In section  2, we highlighted  three  properties  desirable  for 
an effective worm detection and  response system. We believe that CARDINAL 
would provide  these properties through implementing T cell immunity and  tol- 
erance as follows: 
 
–  Types of system responses should be determined by attack sever- 
ity and certainty: CARDINAL  determines appropriate types of responses 
based  on the attack severity  and  certainty  assessed  by DCs.  DCs exposed 
to various  types of danger  signals produce  different levels of costimulatory 
signals and cytokines, which in turn stimulate naive T cells recognising the 
antigen presented by  DCs.  The  different degrees  of accumulated costimu- 
latory signals and  cytokines reflect the severity and  certainty of an  attack 
measured  collectively over multiple time steps and data sources. This kind of 
collective measurement would provide  more accurate grounds  to determine 
appropriate types of responses. 
–  For performing adequate magnitudes of  reponses, both local and 
peer information needs to be taken into account:  a  local  effector 
T  cell assigned  to a specific type of response  can  be further stimulated or 
suppressed  by  the interaction  with  peer  effector T  cells. This  stimulation 
and suppression  is realised through updating the number  of clones assigned 
to each effector T cell, which performs a specific type of response. 
–  Optimise the number of peer hosts polled: CARDINAL  optimises  the 
number  of clones(=the number  of peer  hosts polled)  assigned  to each  ef- 
fector  T  cell by dynamically  estimating  the severity  of the worm’s  threat, 
the certainty of attack detection, and the growth rate of the infection.  This 

 
 
 
 
estimation is implemented via several stages of different types of cell interac- 
tions. These interactions include tissue and  DC, DC and  naive T cell, local 
effector T  cell and  peer  effector T  cell, and  local CTL  and  local Th1  cell 
interactions. As a result of these interactions, if CARDINAL  considers  the 
identified attacks to be more severe, certain, and to propagate faster, CAR- 
DINAL  triggers  a larger  number  of hosts  to evoke an  automated  reponse. 
In addition, CARDINAL  immediately suppresses  the number  of peer hosts 
polled when it observes that the severity and certainty of an attack becomes 
less, and the propagation speed of an observed  attack becomes slower. 
 
The  current  mechanisms  within  CARDINAL,  inspired  by T  cell immunity 
and tolerance, would provide these three desirable properties, which will help an 
automated worm detection and response system to reduce a false positive error. 
 
 
5 Conclusion 
 
 
In  this paper,  we have  shown  how  the link  between  the the innate immune 
system(DCs) and the adaptive immune systems(T-cells), can be computationally 
modelled to form the basis of a novel worm detection algorithm. In particular, we 
identified three key properties of T- cell and mapped  these into the CARDINAL 
system: *T-cell proliferation - to optimise the number of peer hosts polled. *T-cell 
differentiation  - to assess attack severity and  certainty and  *T-cell modulation 
and interaction - to balance  local and peer information. 
Further extensions of the presented T-cell algorithm are possible. In partic- 
ular,  performance  could be enhanced  by including  the notion of antigen gener- 
alisation leading  to T-cell  memory.  Additionally, immunologists have  recently 
discovered a potentially third T-cell line in the shape of regulatory T-cells. It is 
currently thought that these cells form an important part in inducing  tolerance 
by regulating other T-cell behaviour.  However, more details  have yet to emerge 
before this class of cell can  be efficiently incorporated into our  computational 
model. 
It is also  worth noting here  that the proposed  T-cell  algorithm does  not 
operate in isolation, but  in unison as a part of the novel danger  theory inspired 
system [1]. Thus,  it is essential for the algorithm to work with artificial tissue [4] 
and  dendritic cell algorithms [6]. Once integrated, these systems should  mirror 
the robustness and effectiveness of their human  counterparts. 
Current work is focusing on implementing a simulated model of AIS adopting 
CARDINAL.  To reflect worm propagation in the real world, the simulated model 
needs to accommodate a number  of settings and parameters such as the type of 
worm (random-scan worm or topology-based worm), a network  topology, a rate 
of worm infection  depending  on selected worm types and  the network  topology 
etc.  In order  to provide  such a realistic environment in the CARDINAL  simu- 
lated model, the epidemic  models defining the state transitions and  conditions 
of infections are being currently studied [3] [13] [14].
