Perception and Acceptance of an Autonomous Refactoring Bot
Marvin Wyrich1
a, Regina Hebig2
b, Stefan Wagner1
c and Riccardo Scandariato2
d
1University of Stuttgart, Germany
2Chalmers | University of Gothenburg, Sweden

Keywords:
Software Bot, Refactoring, Human Agent Interaction, Collaborative Development, Software Engineering
Abstract:
The use of autonomous bots for automatic support in software development tasks is increasing. In the past,
however, they were not always perceived positively and sometimes experienced a negative bias compared to
their human counterparts. We conducted a qualitative study in which we deployed an autonomous refactoring
bot for 41 days in a student software development project. In between and at the end, we conducted semi-
structured interviews to ﬁnd out how developers perceive the bot and whether they are more or less critical
when reviewing the contributions of a bot compared to human contributions. Our ﬁndings show that the bot
was perceived as a useful and unobtrusive contributor, and developers were no more critical of it than they
were about their human colleagues, but only a few team members felt responsible for the bot.
1
INTRODUCTION
Refactoring has been deﬁned as “the process of
changing a software system in such a way that it does
not alter the external behavior of the code yet im-
proves its internal structure” (Fowler, 1999, p. xvi). It
is essential to continuously go through this process to
improve the quality and maintainability of the source
code, thereby increasing the productivity of develop-
ers (Moser et al., 2008) and avoiding the accumula-
tion of technical debt in the system (Avgeriou et al.,
2016). Some static code analysis tools identify refac-
toring opportunities in the form of code smells, which
are functioning program code that is poorly struc-
tured (Fowler, 1999). Manually removing these code
smells is error-prone, tedious and sometimes chal-
lenging (Bavota et al., 2012; Kim et al., 2011, 2012).
The effort and associated costs may also become too
high to be justiﬁed to a client or project manager,
which prevents developers from having the necessary
resources or organizational support to manually im-
prove the quality of the source code (Yamashita and
Moonen, 2013).
To make the removal of code smells more efﬁcient
and more effective, Wyrich and Bogner (2019) imple-
a
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8506-3294
b
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1459-2081
c
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5256-8429
d
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3591-7671
mented an autonomous bot that automatically refac-
tors code and submits its changes to the development
team for asynchronous review in the form of pull re-
quests. A recent study has shown that such changes
with automatically ﬁxed code smells are generally ac-
cepted by developers (Marcilio et al., 2019). How-
ever, pull requests in that study were proposed man-
ually and only a single time after prior consultation
with the project maintainers. Furthermore, we know
that contributions are not only evaluated on their con-
tent, but also on the social characteristics of the con-
tributor (Terrell et al., 2017; Ford et al., 2019). In
the case of contributing bots, identifying them as bots
can be sufﬁcient to observe a negative bias compared
to contributions from humans (Murgia et al., 2016).
We therefore introduced the Refactoring-Bot in a
software development team and had it continuously
contribute refactoring suggestions for 41 days. The
developers knew it was a bot and could interact with
it. In between and at the end, we conducted semi-
structured interviews to answer the following research
questions:
• RQ1: How do developers perceive the participa-
tion of a refactoring bot in their project?
• RQ2: Are developers more or less critical when
reviewing the contributions of a refactoring bot
compared to human contributions?
• RQ3: How do developers think an autonomous
refactoring bot should ideally be designed?
arXiv:2001.02553v1  [cs.SE]  8 Jan 2020

2
RELATED WORK
Wyrich
and
Bogner
(2019)
describe
the
Refactoring-Bot as “an autonomous bot that in-
tegrates into the team like a human developer via
the existing version control platform”. It currently
supports a handful of refactoring operations to elimi-
nate code smells reported by the static code analysis
tool SonarQube.
These operations are removing
unused method parameters, unused private ﬁelds and
commented-out code, correcting the wrong order
of modiﬁers, adding missing override annotations
and immediately returning an expression instead of
assigning it to a new variable. It is also possible to
interact with the bot via comments in its pull requests,
for example to instruct further refactoring operations.
While the authors have carefully described their
design decisions and discuss potential success factors
for acceptance among developers, an evaluation of
the bot is yet missing.
Wessel et al. (2018) analyzed 351 Open-Source
projects and found that 93 (26%) use bots which
complement other developers’ work. The authors in-
terviewed project maintainers to investigate, among
other things, how contributors and integrators per-
ceive bots during the pull request submission pro-
cess. Most respondents perceived bots as helpful for
most of the tasks and more than 90% of them high-
lighted the relevance of quality assurance tasks. How-
ever, among 14 identiﬁed bots for code or pull request
review there was no bot that automatically provides
refactoring suggestions.
Spence et al. (2014) conducted an experiment in
which participants were either told that they are go-
ing to communicate with a human or that their inter-
action partner is going to be a robot. They then mea-
sured the uncertainty about the upcoming interaction,
anticipated interpersonal liking, and social presence.
Spence et al. (2014) found that participants who be-
lieved they were to communicate with another person
had higher expectations of liking, lower levels of un-
certainty, and higher expectations of social presence
than those who believed they were to communicate
with a robot.
Related to the liking of bots compared to hu-
mans, Murgia et al. (2016) have found in an experi-
ment with developers on Stack Overﬂow that an an-
swer bot is perceived signiﬁcantly more negatively
when it reveals its identity as a bot. Developers rated
the answers of the supposed human as more positive
compared to the identical bot, which revealed its iden-
tity. This attitude towards bots could also have a de-
cisive inﬂuence in our evaluation study. We address
this in particular with RQ2.
Marcilio et al. (2019) evaluated the acceptance
of automatic refactoring proposals. They ﬁxed code
smells in 12 projects and proposed 920 ﬁxes in 38
pull requests.
84% of the pull requests were ac-
cepted, 95% of them without modiﬁcations. The code
changes were performed automatically, but proposed
manually and only in a short period of time to projects
that had previously expressed interest. The reviews
of the maintainers and correction requests were also
responded to manually. This differs from the continu-
ous work with an autonomous bot, which submits this
kind of code changes and is limited in its interaction
possibilities.
3
METHODS
To answer the research questions we had the
Refactoring-Bot work in a student software develop-
ment project over a period of 41 days and without
manual intervention of the authors. After 11 days,
intermediate interviews were conducted with the de-
velopers who had interacted with the bot during that
time, and based on the interview results, we modiﬁed
the parameters of the Refactoring-Bot for the remain-
ing 30 days. After 41 days the ﬁnal interviews with
all project participants took place.
3.1
Participants and Project
The team consisted of 11 bachelor students of Soft-
ware Engineering, of whom eight were male and three
were female. As part of their studies, they must par-
ticipate in a six-month joint software project. In this
case, they had to further develop an existing code base
with about 18k SLOC. During the ﬁrst two months the
students were introduced to the project and introduced
each other to technologies and methods. This was fol-
lowed by the development period, during which the
bot was also introduced. Students were in the fourth
or ﬁfth semester of their studies and had already de-
veloped software together in a smaller team in the
past.
The backend of the software to be developed was
written in Java and the code was hosted as a pri-
vate GitLab project. We use the term “pull request”
throughout the paper, meaning suggestions for code
changes, although GitLab’s terminology uses the term
“merge request”. The functionality is the same.
3.2
Research Design
At the beginning of the six-month project, we asked
the students if they would agree to the introduction

of a refactoring bot to the team at a later date as part
of a study. About two months later, we informed the
team that the bot would from now on help to improve
the code quality and that we would ask them for their
feedback later.
The ﬁrst phase began, in which we had the bot
create exactly one pull request per day at 3pm. The
bot also checked every minute to see if there were
any new comments on its pull requests that it had
to respond to. After 11 days, we conducted semi-
structured interviews with the only two participants
who had interacted with the bot up to that point to
capture the ﬁrst impression of the participants and
collect optimization suggestions for the second and
longer phase of the study.
The ﬁndings from the 45-minute interim interview
with both participants gave us initial answers to the
research questions and a few of the suggestions for
improvement made by the interviewees could be im-
plemented immediately before the start of the second
phase. From then on the bot created pull requests ev-
ery Tuesday and Thursday between 9am and 6pm ev-
ery half hour, if the number of already open pull re-
quests by the bot was less than four. The timing can
be explained by the fact that the team meetings always
took place on Tuesdays and Thursdays and that it was
assumed that all team members would then be on-site
and could better focus on the pull requests during this
period.
After the ﬁrst phase, we also slightly changed the
description of the pull requests to include a link to
the list of available commands and interaction op-
tions. This was requested by the participants in the
interviews. An example pull request description cre-
ated by the bot is shown in Figure 1. The team was
informed about all changes before the second phase
started.
After 41 days the operation of the bot ended and
we conducted semi-structured interviews again. This
time nine people took part, even though not all of
them were proven to have reviewed a pull request.
However, to evaluate the acceptance of the bot, it is
equally important to discuss the attitude and experi-
ence of those who consciously or unconsciously did
not interact with the bot. On average, the interviews
lasted 20 minutes.
3.3
Interview Guideline
We conducted the interim interview and the ﬁnal in-
terviews following the same procedure. Participants
were invited and informed about the background of
the interview and then had the choice to sign a con-
sent form or not to participate. The interviews were
recorded, then transcribed, manually analysed, trans-
lated into English and summarised with regard to an-
swering the research questions.
During the interview process, we were guided by
an interview guideline. To not interrupt the ﬂow of the
conversation, we adapted the order of the questions to
the respective answers. Occasionally the interviewees
also came back to previously asked questions at a later
time and added something to their comments.
The contents of the interview guidelines only dif-
fered slightly between the interim interview and the
ﬁnal interviews and both served to answer the three
research questions. While the interim interview was
about gaining a ﬁrst impression and starting into
the second phase with small and immediately imple-
mentable optimizations, these changes were speciﬁ-
cally addressed in the ﬁnal interviews. The interview
guidelines were structured as follows:
The ﬁrst question encouraged the interviewees to re-
ﬂect openly on their interaction with the bot. A sec-
ond question followed and asked directly how the de-
velopers felt about the bot’s behaviour and its pull
requests in terms of quality, usefulness, frequency
and timing.
In the ﬁnal interviews, we mentioned
as a third point that we had experimented during the
study on frequency and timing and we asked how the
study participants perceived this and which variant
they would prefer. We also pointed out the different
observations in the two phases (see section 4.2) and
asked the participants for their opinion. With the an-
swers of the participants to these three questions, we
have gained the most insights to answer RQ1. The
fourth question served to answer RQ2 and aimed at
how the participants perceived the pull requests of
the bot compared to those of human developers and
whether they experienced a difference in trust, for ex-
ample. The ﬁfth and last question was derived from
RQ3, whether the interviewee wanted to use the bot
in the future and if so, how the ideal refactoring bot
would look like in their future team.
4
RESULTS
In the following we describe the results of our
study, grouped by each research question.
4.1
Perception of the Bot (RQ1)
“The problem with our IDE is that it points to
bad things, but some developers don’t want to
ﬁx those things or forget about it or are sim-
ply too lazy. And the bot would always do it.
That’s a real beneﬁt.” – P02

Immediately return the expression assigned to variable 'result'.
Hi, I'm a refactoring bot. I found and fixed a code smell and think that it improves the readability of the code.
If something needs to be changed, you can commit to this merge request or tell me what to change in a line specific

inside the comment.
If you are okay with the changes you can accept the merge request as usual.
Open
Opened 3 minutes ago by 
Samantha Bo
Edit
Close merge request

Figure 1: Description of a pull request proposed by the Refactoring-Bot, Samantha Bo.
The team members perceived the bot and its refactor-
ing suggestions as useful and repeatedly stated that it
offered additional value because it tirelessly improved
code quality, which a developer may not be able to
do because other things seem to be more important.
The bot would break down a big block of refactoring
work and suggest refactoring from time to time while
at the same time working on new functionality would
be possible. The bot would also behave unobtrusively.
One participant was amused that the ﬁrst pull re-
quest of the bot changed code that the team had never
touched. Otherwise, the quality of the suggestions
was found to be good and correct.
Overall, the bot was not often communicated with
via comments in pull requests. However, one partici-
pant noticed the limited interaction possibilities neg-
atively, because he expected the Refactoring-Bot to
have simple communication skills he knew from chat
bots. In the way the bot describes itself, one could
assume that it is possible to talk to it in the same way
as with an intelligent virtual assistant. Another par-
ticipant wished that one could ask the bot why ex-
actly it made a particular change as part of its refac-
toring. For example, it could communicate that it had
to change method calls as a result of removing an un-
used parameter from a signature. One could also bet-
ter understand in larger refactorings why something
was implemented in a certain way and perhaps even
learn something.
Although we did not ask for it, two interviewees
commented that they liked the bots name and proﬁle
picture.
RQ1. The bot was perceived as a useful and unob-
trusive contributor. Interaction possibilities should be
extended to better understand speciﬁc changes and
simple chatbot functionalities would be expected.
4.2
Acceptance of the Bot (RQ2)
“People also make mistakes sometimes, and
we have proven this often enough.” – P04
Before we answer the question of whether develop-
ers are more or less critical about the bot’s contribu-
tions than those of humans, we investigate the overall
acceptance rate of its pull requests. Figure 2 shows
that a total of 14 pull requests were created, of which
eleven were created in the ﬁrst phase and three in the
second phase, which started on day 16. Ten pull re-
quests were accepted (71.4%) and four were still open
at the end of the study period (28.6%). In two of them,
the bot removed an unused method parameter that ac-
tually should have been used in the method body. The
bot unknowingly pointed out a defect to the develop-
ers that could not be corrected in the short term. They
therefore intentionally left the pull requests open as a
reminder.
As described in 3.2, during the ﬁrst eleven days
one pull request was created each day. After that, pull
requests were created every half hour on Tuesdays
and Thursdays, as long as less than four were open
at the same time. While on average two accepted pull
requests per week and no rejections indicate a gen-
eral acceptance of the Refactoring-Bot, the change
after the ﬁrst phase in the frequency of suggestions
and the limitation of simultaneously open ones led
to a noticeable decrease in the number of processed
pull requests. As a reminder, these changes were im-
plemented based on the responses of the team mem-
bers from the interim interviews. When we addressed
these changes in the ﬁnal interviews, we could ob-
serve different reactions. Two of the participants did
not notice the changes at all. Others liked the idea of
proposing pull requests when developers are on site,
and the idea of having a limit, since developers could
more easily motivate themselves to work through only

1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Figure 2: Pull requests created by the bot during the 41-day study period. Two solid vertical lines mark the end of the ﬁrst
phase and the beginning of the second phase. Each green bar represents the time frame from the creation of a pull request to
its acceptance. No pull requests were rejected. Yellow bars represent pull requests that were neither accepted nor rejected by
the end of the study period. Grey circles stand for times when the bot was prevented from creating a new pull request by the
limit of four simultaneously open ones.
a few open pull requests and it would be easier to keep
up with the reviews. However, the majority of respon-
dents did not consider this change useful in retrospect.
Even the participants of the intermediate interview,
who explicitly expressed their preference for limiting
the bot, changed their views to optimize the effective-
ness of the bot. If the bot had much to improve, it
should also make many suggestions for improvement.
As soon as many pull requests accumulate in the list,
the team would be interested in someone taking care
of these so that their own pull requests can be found.
The change in parameters revealed the underlying
problem that only few team members felt responsi-
ble for reviewing the bot’s pull requests. In the inter-
views, we learned that it was also difﬁcult for human
developers to ﬁnd reviewers for their own changes.
Completing one’s own tasks was a higher priority for
team members for various reasons. The bot simply
had the disadvantage of not being able to directly con-
tact the other team members and persuade them to re-
view its changes, just as the other team members did
for their own pull requests. In addition, some team
members were inexperienced with the version con-
trol system and did not dare to merge into the master
branch because they were afraid to break something.
In the end, however, most of the bot’s pull requests
have been accepted. We asked speciﬁcally whether
it made a difference for the developers to review the
changes of a bot compared to those of a human, for
example in terms of trust. The interviewees replied
that, in general, it makes no difference whether the
pull request comes from a bot or a human and that this
attitude has not changed over time. The bot would
suggest simple changes that the team could be sure
would not affect functionality. And both, human and
bot, could sometimes make mistakes.
Participants all felt that it was more important to
look at the content of a pull request and to review
the content thoroughly. However, some interviewees
also noted that their way of approaching the review
would depend on their previous experience with the
person or bot who proposed the changes. “There are
people where I look at the functionality and do not
have to worry about code quality. But then there are
some people for which I have to have a closer look at
their pull requests, because of my recent experience
with their work” – P07. The same would apply to the
Refactoring-Bot. Furthermore, the changes of a bot
would be reviewed with a different focus. They would
know the contributor was a bot that, in turn, would not
know what the original code was for. Therefore, they
primarily checked the code changes for logical errors.
The only danger they saw was that the bot might sug-
gest simple refactorings for too long and at some point
will propose something riskier that would then not be
reviewed sufﬁciently well.
RQ2. Ten out of 14 pull requests were accepted,
four were still open at the end of the study pe-
riod. Only few people felt responsible for reviewing
pull requests. The bot was disadvantaged because
it could not approach individual team members di-
rectly and ask them for a review. However, the par-
ticipants were neither more nor less critical about
the bot than about their human teammates. The pre-
vious experience with the contributor was decisive
for the thoroughness of the review and changes of
the bot were mostly examined for logical errors.

4.3
The Ideal Refactoring Bot (RQ3)
“Later, in professional life, I am sure someone
will take care of it.” – P08
All interviewees explicitly responded that they would
like to use the bot in a future project. The answers to
the question what the ideal refactoring bot would look
like can be summarized in three points.
First, the frequency of pull requests should be
carefully evaluated. Some consider a ﬁxed limit of
open pull requests to be useful, but would probably
have set it higher than four and in relation to the num-
ber of team members. Others generally argued against
a limit, since these were small changes and the code
quality could only be improved effectively without a
limit.
Second, there was the request that the changes of
the bot should be grouped in a meaningful way, so
that less pull requests but bigger ones are created. At
the beginning smaller pull requests were good to get
used to the bot. Later, however, grouping changes has
the advantage that fewer refactoring commits would
appear in the history and it would be more worthwhile
to test the code of the pull request before merging it
into the master branch.
By far the most frequently raised point was that
one or more people within the team should be made
responsible for reviewing the bot’s pull requests in a
coordinated way. Respondents could also imagine the
bot itself assigning someone to review, at best the de-
veloper who is familiar with the part of the code or
even the one who caused the code smell. In any case,
it would be important to ﬁnd a responsible person, and
some of the team members also think that this would
be easier in a more professional environment.
RQ3. The participants of the study were all in favour
of using the bot in a future project. It was controver-
sial how often the bot should make suggestions. Par-
ticipants considered it appropriate to group changes
into fewer and slightly larger pull requests, which
again would affect the preferred frequency of the bot’s
suggestions. They agreed that the successful opera-
tion of the bot also required someone to feel respon-
sible for reviewing the pull requests.
5
DISCUSSION
In the following, we compare our results with
those from existing literature, describe the limitations
of our study and complete the chapter with implica-
tions that raise interesting questions for future work.
5.1
Results
We saw that the bot was accepted by the developers,
and they explicitly stated that they were neither more
nor less critical in reviewing the contributions of the
bot compared to those of humans. This is contrary to
the results of Murgia et al. (2016), who had observed
a clear negative bias against their answer bot on Stack
Overﬂow.
The approval of 71.4% of the proposed pull re-
quests and the rejection of none at the same time con-
ﬁrms the general acceptance and is in line with the re-
sults of Marcilio et al. (2019) that such code changes
are accepted by developers.
Social aspects of the contributor played a role in
recent studies (Terrell et al., 2017; Ford et al., 2019,
e.g.)
and we can conﬁrm that there are at least a
few consciously perceived differences from the de-
veloper’s point of view as to whether the contrib-
utor is human or bot.
In the latter case, the pro-
posed changes were mostly reviewed for logic errors.
Furthermore, two participants commented unsolicited
that they liked the proﬁle picture and the name of the
bot, which conﬁrms the ﬁndings to the extent that so-
cial aspects are actually perceived. We also found that
previous experience with the bot plays a role in evalu-
ating its code changes. According to the participants,
however, this is no different with humans.
Finally, we have seen that there is potential for im-
provement in the implementation of the bot. Wessel
et al. (2018) analyzed the usage of bots in open source
projects. Most often respondents in their study pro-
posed to make bots smarter and enhance user inter-
action. Additionally, they mentioned the lack of in-
formation on how to interact with them. This is con-
sistent with our ﬁndings that developers were unsure
how to communicate with the bot and expected it to
have at least the capabilities of a simple chat bot. Ad-
ditionally, the most common suggestion to improve
bots in their study from an integrator perspective was
that notiﬁcation and awareness should be improved.
This was necessary, for example, to remind develop-
ers of unresolved issues.
Improving awareness, especially the sense of re-
sponsibility for the bot’s pull requests, might be one
of the most important insights for the successful use
of the Refactoring-Bot. As long as manual interven-
tion by developers is necessary and the intrinsic mo-
tivation of individuals is not high enough, this poses
a threat to the acceptance of such maintenance bots.
One explanation could be the diffusion of responsibil-
ity, a sociopsychological phenomenon in which a per-
son may feel less responsible for actions or inactivity
when others are present (Kassin et al., 2019).

In our scenario, all participants found the bot use-
ful and understood its value. Because everyone could
have reviewed the pull requests, few people might
have felt responsible for it. Of the nine team mem-
bers interviewed, six stated that they relied on a few
speciﬁc people because they had also reviewed most
of the pull requests of the other team members.
5.2
Limitations
The results of this study should be seen in the light of
some limitations. First, the participants in our study
were relatively inexperienced in developing software
when compared to professional software developers.
This was particularly apparent from the participants’
responses that some were uncertain about processing
pull requests. In addition, the low sense of responsi-
bility for reviewing pull requests could be a limitation
that is generally associated with the study of students.
This might be different in a team of professionals.
Then, the development time of a software project
is typically longer than the time the bot was deployed
in our study. We were limited by the length of the
development phase in the student project and would
have preferred to deploy the bot for a longer period of
time. The long-term use of the bot needs to be inves-
tigated in future studies, as we do not know whether
perception and acceptance will improve or deterio-
rate over time and which design-critical aspects result
from the long-term use.
In addition, the limited duration of the study did not
allow us to wait for the open pull requests from the
ﬁrst phase to be processed. As a result, four pull re-
quests were already open at the beginning of the sec-
ond phase, thus limiting the comparability of the two
phases.
Since we mainly made general statements
about the perception and acceptance of the bot over
the entire period, we do not consider the core ﬁnd-
ings to be affected by this. On the contrary, we only
came to an essential understanding of responsibility
issues because these pull requests from the ﬁrst phase
limited the further work of the bot.
The choice of the bot used in the study and its
current state of implementation also have limitations.
The Refactoring-Bot currently only supports compar-
atively simple refactorings. The review behavior as
well as the requirements for frequency and size of
pull requests can change with increasing complexity
of the refactorings. However, a look at the code smells
reported by static code analysis tools such as Sonar-
Qube shows that most of them require rather uncom-
plicated code improvements.
In general, the choice of a refactoring bot and the con-
text in which it was operated could be a reason for
some of the observed differences with related work,
for example with that of Murgia et al. (2016), in
which an answer bot was evaluated on Stack Over-
ﬂow, where the participating developers could as-
sume interaction only with other human developers.
This deviation from expectation could then have led
to the negative bias observed in the study (Spence
et al., 2014).
In contrast, the participation of bots
in software projects is becoming increasingly com-
mon (Wessel et al., 2018) and may therefore generate
greater acceptance, as was the case in our study.
5.3
Implications
Developers may accept bots – even if they are
identiﬁed as such
We saw that the bot in our study was accepted by the
developers and even to the extent that the review of
the bot’s contributions was no more critical than that
of human developers. This should create conﬁdence
in the bot community that the automation of software
engineering tasks via a bot interface generally has the
potential to be accepted by developers. Since this has
been different in previous studies in other contexts,
the impact of a bot’s operating context on its design
and acceptance should be investigated more closely.
Bots need to be process-sensitive
In addition to context-dependent design, the question
arose as to how process-sensitive a bot must be. In
this case, the bot did not correspond to the process of
the team, which includes that the entity contributing
changes must ﬁnd a reviewer itself. This could easily
be resolved by automatically assigning a suitable re-
viewer to the bot’s pull requests. However, we do not
know if this would actually be enough, or if the un-
derlying problem is that few people feel responsible
for dealing with the bot. The smarter advice might be
to make it difﬁcult to ignore the bot when designing a
demonstrably useful bot whose effectiveness depends
on human intervention.
Bots need to be smart
Finally, bots must be intelligent enough to provide de-
velopers with a satisfying experience of interaction.
This includes describing exactly how to interact with
them and that there exists a basic repertoire of chat bot
functionalities that are common in many applications
nowadays. The bot should also be able to explain its
activities upon request. In our case, the requirement
arose to be able to explain individual code changes of
a refactoring.

6
CONCLUSION
A refactoring bot was developed in the past to
overcome the drawbacks of removing code smells
manually and to make the process more efﬁcient and
effective. As similar bots did not always meet with
high acceptance in the context of software engineer-
ing and since we have little qualitative knowledge
about the perception and acceptance of development
bots in general, we conducted a qualitative study de-
ploying a refactoring bot to investigate how it is per-
ceived and accepted in a software development team.
In semi-structured interviews we found that the
bot is perceived as a useful and unobtrusive contribu-
tor. Its contributions are not reviewed more critically
than those of human developers but are more inten-
sively analyzed for logical errors. Although all team
members intend to continue using the bot, only a few
felt responsible for it during the study.
The results have implications for the design of
bots to ensure their successful use. Even a useful bot
will be ignored if its perceived beneﬁt for the indi-
vidual is not great enough and there is a diffusion of
responsibility in the team. Developers accept bots,
but they must be smart and adapted to the context and
process of the development team.
Future work could explore which context vari-
ables predict the acceptance of a bot and investigate
more bots qualitatively. Their long-term use should
be investigated along with how the developers’ per-
ception changes over time. In the context of refac-
toring bots, the effects of proposing more complex
and diverse refactorings on the behavior of developers
should be studied. The ﬁndings would also be of in-
terest to other maintenance bots which regularly pro-
pose very similar changes, possibly leading to a kind
of review blindness. Finally, the results can be un-
derstood as an indication that people appreciated that
a socially unpleasant task was taken over by the bot,
which was to remind people that code quality needs
to be improved. It would be interesting to further ex-
plore the potential of this type of bot contribution.
