Is the User Enjoying the Conversation? A Case Study
on the Impact on the Reward Function.
Lina M. Rojas-Barahona.
Orange-Labs. Lannion
2 Avenue Pierre Marzin
22300, Lannion France.

Abstract
The impact of user satisfaction in policy learning task-oriented dialogue systems
has long been a subject of research interest. Most current models for estimat-
ing the user satisfaction either (i) treat out-of-context short-texts, such as product
reviews, or (ii) rely on turn features instead of on distributed semantic represen-
tations. In this work we adopt deep neural networks that use distributed semantic
representation learning for estimating the user satisfaction in conversations. We
evaluate the impact of modelling context length in these networks. Moreover, we
show that the proposed hierarchical network outperforms state-of-the-art quality
estimators. Furthermore, we show that applying these networks to infer the reward
function in a Partial Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) yields to a
great improvement in the task success rate.
1
Introduction
The impact of user satisfaction in policy learning for task-oriented dialogue systems has long been
a subject of research interest [1, 2, 3, 4]. Similarly, sentiment analysis has been widely adopted to
analyse massive blogs, recommendations tweets and reviews [5, 6]. Although sentiment analysis
can be used to infer user satisfaction, most of the work in the literature that incorporates sentiment
analysis in dialogue has focused on the generation of empathetic responses in end-to-end models for
chitchat [7, 8]. Moreover, most sentiment analysis solutions focus on the analysis of out-of-context
short texts [5]. In this work we are interested in the study of user satisfaction for measuring the
quality of the interaction in task-oriented dialogues, in which dialogue is modelled as a POMDP [9].
Our contribution in this paper is twofold. First we study distinct deep learning networks that use
distributed representations for predicting satisfaction scores. At this stage we would like to answer
the following question: does relying only on distributed representations improve the performance of
neural models? Therefore we evaluate the performance of hierarchical networks and state-of-the-art
Transformers initialised with pre-trained word and contextual representations respectively.
Second, we evaluate the impact of using the best trained network for computing the reward function
within a POMDP dialogue framework [10]. We would like to determine how realistic it is to incorpo-
rate user satisfaction estimators that rely solely on distributional semantics in reinforcement learning
(RL) dialogue systems. This approach can be used for instance to train satisfaction predictors from
large human-human chats, in which satisfaction has been self-scored by users.
Our case study is the English LEGO corpus of human-machine spoken conversations [11], which has
been annotated at each system turn with the interaction quality (IQ), ranging from 1 (poor quality) to
5 (good quality). Our results suggest that distributed representations do outperform state-of-the-art
models trained on ﬁne-tuned features. We also show that using IQ estimators in the reward function
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
arXiv:2101.05004v1  [cs.CL]  13 Jan 2021

greatly improves the task success rate for dialogues in the same domain the networks were trained
on, which in this case is the Let’s Go domain [12].
In the remainder of this paper we present the related work in Section 2. We introduce the user satis-
faction estimators in Section 3. The Reward function and POMDP dialogue framework is explained
in Section 4. The results of our experiments are described in Section 5. Finally the discussion and
conclusions are presented in Section 6.
2
Related Work
The prediction of the IQ score for the LEGO corpus was ﬁrst presented in [13] with a Support
Vector Machine (SVM) baseline. More recently a Bi-directional Long-Short Term Memory (BiL-
STM) network to predict the IQ was proposed in [4]. Both the SVM and the BiLSTM were trained
on ﬁne-tuned turn features such as the automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) success,
the ASR mean confidence, type of system action and the number of rejections.
The IQ predictors presented in [4] were applied to task-oriented dialogue domains other than the
Let’s Go domain (e.g. Cambridge restaurants, Cambridge hotels and San Francisco restaurants) for
computing the reward within a POMDP policy learning framework.
Unlike [4, 13] the models proposed in this paper rely solely on distributed semantic representations
instead of on turn features. Turn features are not always available when using proprietary ASR
services, which typically merely return the best transcription. In addition ASR features are not
applicable to chatbots. Inspired by [4] we are also interested in evaluating the impact of quality
estimators on the reward function for dialogue policy learning but applied to the Let’s Go domain
with simple and complex constraints (Table 3).
In this paper we evaluate the adoption of Transformers for the estimation of the user satisfaction
on dialogue data. Although [14] proposed contextual representations for dialogue, their distributed
representations are specialised on retrieval-based approaches, in which the existence of a set of
candidate responses at each turn is assumed. Since we aim to apply Transformers to task-oriented
dialogues of great length we did not adopt [14] embeddings in this work. For the same reason, our
work is different of generative end-to-end approaches to dialogue [7, 8], since our goal is to build
dialogues that successfully achieve a task that has been well deﬁned in a knowledge-base. In this
work, generation is only a component of a complex dialogue architecture, not the whole dialogue
system (Figure 2).
3
Networks for Estimating the User Satisfaction
We study three distinct neural networks: hierarchical Gated Recurrent Units(GRUs) [15] with atten-
tion , Transformers for generating contextual embeddings that feed a GRU layer and solely Trans-
formers [16]. We are interested in studying the impact of context-length in transformers, because
real dialogues can easily attain a context of thousands of tokens (Table 1). Therefore, we explore
BERT [17], DistilBERT [18] and Transformers eXtra-Large (Transformers-XL) [19].
(i) Hierarchical GRUs:
Figure 1(a) shows the network. It has a Bidirectional GRU layer (BiGRU)
at the lower level that returns the turn representation htk (Eq. 3).
⃗
htk = GRU(Etk,
⃗
htk−1)
(1)
⃗
htk = GRU(Etk,
⃗
htk−1)
(2)
htk = [
⃗
htk−1,
⃗
htk]
(3)
Attention is used to weight relevant units in the turn hidden representation (Eq. 6) .
ha
tk = tanh(Wtk · htk)
(4)
αtk = softmax(γ(W a · ha
tk))
(5)
ha
t = α · htk
(6)
A GRU layer is then used to process dialogues as a sequence of turns.
ht = GRU(ha
t , ha
t−1)
(7)
2

The last layer is a Softmax that predicts the IQ score:
P(Yt = c|ht, W, b) =
e(Wcht+bc)
P
c′ e(Wc′ht+bc′)
(8)
where c ∈[1, .., C] is the index of the output neuron representing one class (C = 5 for IQ scores).
The predicted score is the most probable class:
ˆyt = argmaxc(P(Yt = c|ht, W, b))
(9)
(a) Hierarchical GRUs
(b) Contextual embeddings+GRU
(c) Transformer
Figure 1: The proposed neural architectures for predicting the user satisfaction. ET k in (a) is the
embedding for the kth token of the last turn (t = T). In (b) tokT 1 = [CLS] and tokT k = [SEP]
after applying the WordPiece tokenization to the last turn (t = T). In (c) tok1, ..., tokD are the
tokens of the dialogue after applying the WordPiece tokenization, in which tok1 = [CLS] and the
token [SEP] marks turn separation. tokD−1 is the last token of the last utterance in the dialogue and
tokD = [SEP].
(ii) Contextual embeddings + GRU:
We investigate the use of transformers as turn representa-
tions thus we propose a BERT-like transformer, which inputs are the tokens of the turn. The turn
representations then feed a GRU layer (Eq. 7). The output of the GRU then feeds a Softmax layer
(Eq. 8) for predicting the score.
(iii) Transformer:
This network is depicted in Figure 1(c). It consists in a transformer that takes
as input the tokens tok1, ..., tokD of the previous and current utterances. Then the output [CLS] of
the transformer feeds a Softmax layer (Eq. 8) for predicting the score of the current utterance.
We evaluate the prediction yt at each system turn t. The back-propagation optimisation is done by
minimising the cross entropy loss function [20] through stochastic gradient descent.
4
The Reward Function in a POMDP Dialogue System
Reinforcement Learning has long been used for learning dialogue strategies [21, 22, 23]. Dialogue
is then formulated as an optimisation problem in which the ﬁnal goal is to maximise the accumulated
reward at long run [23]. The reward is received from the environment (i.e. the user). The optimal
policy is a function that takes as argument the current state s and returns the optimal action a.
POMDPs is an outstanding way of modelling dialogue [9, 24] in which the state is uncertain, namely
the belief-state.
The basic elements of a POMDP dialogue system are shown in Figure 2. The words recognised by
the speech recognition are converted to an abstract representation (the user dialogue acts). These
user dialogue acts are then processed by a belief tracker which maintains a dialogue state s. This
3

is typically a set of variables denoting the slots that the system must ﬁll-in to complete the user’s
goal. For example, in the Let’s Go bus-scheduled information system, the slots might be origin
for the bus departure place and time for the departure time. The state s might record the current
value and conﬁdence level of each slot. From the state, a belief state b (usually just a sub-set of the
state vector) is extracted and an action a is decided based on a dialogue policy. The set of possible
actions will include requesting new slot values, conﬁrming already ﬁlled slot values and accessing
the application for information. Once the appropriate action is determined, it is converted to a textual
message and then rendered by a speech synthesiser.
Figure 2: A POMDP spoken dialogue system with the interaction quality estimator.
The reward function most commonly adopted for task-oriented dialogues penalises every dialogue
turn with −1 and sums a reward of +20 at the end of the dialogue whenever the system provided
the right information to the user or 0 otherwise (Eq. 10) [25].
RT S = T · (−1) + 1T S · 20
(10)
In this work the reward estimator is based on the IQ as deﬁned in [4].
RIQ = T · (−1) + (iq −1) · 5
(11)
Where RIQ describes the ﬁnal reward, iq is the IQ value predicted by the classiﬁer (Section 3),
which is a number from 1 to 5, where 1 represents poor quality and 5 good quality.
We used PyDial [10], the publicly available POMDP dialogue framework and we implemented
an application programming interface (API) that returns the IQ estimation predicted by the neural
models presented in Section 3. Usually RL systems ﬁrst learn the policy on a simulated user (User
Simulator) until an optimal performance is reached, then they are ready to be tested by humans.
5
Experiments
In this section we introduce the corpus as well as describe the experiments and the evaluation met-
rics.
4

5.1
The Dataset
The LEGO corpus collects spoken dialogues between users and the Let’s Go dialogue system [12],
which provides bus schedule information to the Pittsburgh population during off-peak times. 400
dialogues in the corpus have been manually annotated with the IQ score [11]. Since conversations
in LEGO are system-initiative they have a lot of system interactions such as misunderstandings,
conﬁrmations and repetitions, producing quite long dialogues (i.e. hundreds of turns).
Table 1: The LEGO corpus with IQ annotations. Its complexity is measured by the maximum
dialogue length (number of turns per dialogue), the maximum turn length (number of tokens per
turn) and the maximum number of tokens per dialogue.
N. Dialogues
Dialogue length
Max.turn length
Max. toks p/dial.
(max/mean/median)
(max/mean/median)
(max/mean/median)
400
200/65/53
76/26/24
6590/1444/1089
The complexity of the corpus is presented in Table 1, containing long dialogues of up to 200 turns
with up to 76 tokens per turn.
5.2
Hyperparameters and Training
Dropout was used on BiGRUs networks (a dropout rate of 0.5) to prevent co-adaptation of hidden
units by randomly dropping out a proportion of the hidden units during forward propagation [26].
The models were implemented in PyTorch [27]. To initialise the hierarchical models (BiGRUs) we
use FastText embeddings [28] with a dimension d = 300. For contextual embeddings we used the
Transformers HuggingFace library [29] with the pre-trained embeddings and Wordpiece tokenisa-
tion. We used Adam optimiser [30]. All the models were trained on GPU machines with maximum
of 32GB per GPU. We do not use TPUs.
5.3
User Satisfaction Estimators
We compared our networks with the networks presented in [4] for predicting the IQ with the fol-
lowing evaluation metrics: the unweighted average recall (UAR), which is the arithmetic average of
all class-wise recalls, as well as a linearly weighted version of Cohen’s κ and Spearman’s ρ. The
experiments were conducted in a 10-fold cross-validation, assuring that the same dialogue did not
slip into different folds (i.e. dialogue-wise cross validation). We studied the length of the dialogue
context: the turn for which we are predicting the score and the previous turns. We vary the context
length and found an optimal context length of up to 100 turns per dialogue for BiGRUs.
Table 2 shows that our BiGRUs network trained on word embeddings outperforms the state-of-the-
art (BiLSTM+att) networks in all performance measures, obtaining an absolute improvement of +1
for UAR, +9 for κ and +2 for ρ. It is worth noting that the state-of-the-art (BiLSTM+att) networks
were trained on ﬁne-tuned turn features.
These results are encouraging and suggest that distributed representations impacts positively the
performance of satisfaction estimators in hierarchical networks. We would like to study in the next
section whether these models can be used to predict task success in dialogue systems.
Table 2: Performance of the proposed models. The BiGRUs with FastText embeddings outperform
all the networks trained on ﬁne-tuned turn features
.
Predicting IQ
Model
UAR
κ
ρ
SVM feats [4]
44%
53%
69%
BiLSTM+att feats [4]
54%
65%
81%
BiGRUs
55%
74%
83%
DBert+GRU
35%
57%
42%
Trans-XL(ctxt≈1K)
47%
59%
67%
Trans-XL(ctxt≈2K)
44%
58%
67%
5

BERT-based Transformers do not perform well for this task on this dataset when using them to get
the turn representations, namely setting (ii) in Section 3. This can be explained by the large number
of turns dialogues have (i.e., up to 200 turns), the large number of parameters a transformer needs
and the quite short annotated dataset (≈400 dialogues). We ﬁrst tried (BERT+GRU) and due to its
large memory requirement we could only learn weights of up to 7 dialogue turns per dialogue in
a cluster of 32GB-GPU machines (all the other turns representations were frozen). However, with
DistilBERT we could treat up to 15 turns per dialogue while maintaining the same performance.
Fortunately, we could process larger contexts with Transformers-XL (setting (iii) in Section 3),
reaching an optimal performance with ≈1K dialogue tokens. The results of Transformers-XL are
comparable with the SVM baseline trained on ﬁne-tuned features, yielding a better UAR (+3) and
κ (+6) as well as a slightly lower ρ (−2). Having larger contexts ≈2K do not seem to impact
signiﬁcantly their performance. These results suggest that in 32GB-GPU nodes the large context
length (i.e. up to 6.5K tokens per dialogue) is affecting transformers performance as they will
require a prohibited usage of GPU memory to process the whole context.
5.4
The Impact on the Reward Function
We evaluated the impact of the IQ estimators presented in Section 5.3 on the reward function for the
Let’s Go (LetsGo) domain by using PyDial [10].
As shown in Table 3, the Let’s Go dialogue system provides information about bus time-
schedule according to the constraints:
origin, destination, time and route, which cor-
responds to LetsGo(4). LestGo(6) also considers origin neighbourhood and destination
neighbourhood. It is important to note that the Let’s Go domain is far more complex in terms of
the number of database items than other domains available in PyDial.
Table 3: The Let’s Go domain was used to compute the reward function. Note that it is far more
complex in terms of the database items than other domains available in PyDial such as Cambridge
Restaurants .
Domain
#constraints
#DB items
LetsGo(4)
4
100000
LetsGo(6)
6
100000
CamRestaurants(3)
3
110
The experiments run on simulated dialogues as in [4, 24]. We implemented a template-based gen-
erator for the user and the system utterances for the Let’s Go domain because our models rely on
textual inputs (i.e. distributed representations). We compared our models in an environment without
noise because unlike [24] and [4] the simulator in this work runs at the surface-level and not at the
semantic-level and the noise used for User-Simulation in PyDial alters the semantic-dialogue acts
regardless the surface form. In addition, we would like to apply these methods to chatbots, thus
simulating ASR noise would not be appropriate and studying a more appropriated noise is out of the
scope of this paper.
Table 4: Task success rate of the simulated experiments for the Let’s Go domain over three runs
with distinct seeds. Each value is computed after 1000 training dialogues/100 evaluation.
.
Domain
Reward
Task Success Rate(↑)
Average Turns(↓)
LetsGo(4)
RT S
99% ± 1.4
6.5 ± 0.96
RIQ
99% ± 2.1
6.3 ± 0.8
LetsGo(6)
RT S
81% ± 7.78
11 ± 1.09
RIQ
97% ± 3.98
8.9 ± 1.26
We used a policy model based on the GP-SARSA algorithm [25], which is a sample efﬁcient Gaus-
sian process approximation to the value function. We used the focus tracker [31] for belief tracking.
The policy decides on summary actions of the dialogue state tracker which are based on dialogue
acts (e.g., request, inform or conﬁrm). The task success rate was the metric used to measure the
dialogue performance [24].
We observe in Table 4 that the reward computed with RIQ outperforms the classical RT S reward
when having more constraints, namely LetsGO (6). Moreover, dialogues rewarded by RIQ tend to
6

be signiﬁcantly shorter. Although there is not signiﬁcant distinction between RT S and RIQ in terms
of the task success for LetsGO (4), dialogues are slightly short with RIQ. We also conducted pre-
liminary experiments on domain transfer by evaluating RIQ on the Cambridge Restaurants domain,
obtaining a success rate of 44 ± 25.7, compared to 99 ± 1.83 for RT S. Unsurprisingly, RT S and
feature-based RIQ [4] are more robust to unknown domains than embedding-based RIQ because
both task-success and quality features are domain-agnostic.
6
Discussion and Conclusions
We presented in this paper deep learning architectures for the estimation of the user satisfaction
that exploits semantically rich distributed vectors. We found that distributed representations greatly
improve the performance of hierarchical networks (BiGRUs) in all the measures (UAR, κ and ρ) for
estimating turn-level scores.
Moreover, we studied different models by using Transformers-based representations. The results
of our experiments suggest that in 32GB-GPU machines the large context length (i.e. up to 6.5K
tokens per dialogue) is affecting transformers performance as they will require a prohibited usage
of GPU memory to treat the whole context. These results are in line with ﬁndings and claims
presented in [14] regarding the usage of Transformers for real-world conversational applications.
Using Transformers with a limited-token context (≈1K) perform better in terms of UAR and κ
than the SVM baseline presented in [3]. Hierarchical networks (BiGRUs) not only performed better
but also allowed us to study the impact of context by varying the dialogue length. We found that
having a context of up to 100 dialogue turns yields to an optimal performance.
Furthermore, we studied the impact of applying hierarchical networks to compute the reward func-
tion RIQ in a POMDP dialogue system. We found that RIQ trained on distributed representations
is more robust to a larger number of constraints than RT S. However, either RT S or RIQ trained on
turn features([4]) are still more robust to unknown domains because by deﬁnition they are domain-
agnostic.
We have shown that applying distributed-based models to compute the reward function can be a
viable alternative for rewarding RL dialogue systems at runtime in the case ASR features are not
available such as in chatbots. Therefore, one can devise rewarding dialogues at runtime when models
can be trained on a human-human corpus with user-rated interactions.
7
Future Work
As future work we would like to investigate a new generation of Transformers (e.g. generative
transformers GPT−2 [32]) for classiﬁcation tasks applied to long dialogues. We also would like
to further study domain transfer. We can also think in a reward function that combines satisfaction
predictors, task-success and/or objective measures. In addition, we can study different kind of noise
in the user simulation, besides ASR noise, for simulating users’ inputs in chatbots (e.g. misspellings
and typos).
