Find an Optimal Path in Static System and
Dynamical System within Polynomial Runtime
Yong Tan

Abstract
We study an ancient problem that in a static or dynamical sys-
tem, sought an optimal path, which the context always means within
an extremal condition. In fact, through those discussions about this
theme, we established a universal essential calculated model to serve
for these complex systems. Meanwhile we utilize the sample space to
character the system. These contents in this paper would involve in
several major areas including the geometry, probability, graph algo-
rithms and some prior approaches, which stands the ultimately subtle
linear algorithm to solve this class problem. Along with our progress,
our discussion would demonstrate more general meaning and robust
character, which provides clear ideas or notion to support our concrete
applications, who work in a more popular complex system.
Keywords: static system; dynamical system; optimal path;
1
Introduction.
It is clear for those autonomous machines that we particularly desire them
can roam in a smart way. However human has deemed the problem might
be classed to ﬁnding out the optimal lane in any scene. On more popular
meanings, that is to plot a perfect decision-lane within least cost in a complex
system. For example, we plot navigation for a commuting in a city where it
is often in a vehicle jam; let many robots cruising in a narrow and twisted
space without crowd in a certain channel.
It is absolutely unfair to say there has not any available algorithm at-
tempt to solve this class problem before this paper. But while we survey
the context about those methods throughout, we should have these prime
problems issue: these approaches are likely to only work in a static system
with crafted weights; or there need crafted a group natural numbers to tick
endpoints; even to state to refuse a complex entry but cannot deﬁne what
is a complex instance. Such weird requests cannot be clariﬁed to us. In a
word, our followed job must face to a vague context about past methods,
1
arXiv:1602.02377v1  [cs.DS]  7 Feb 2016

and use the new theories and trials to clarify those amid implicit relation-
ships, which ever puzzled our minds. Here author has not got his own mind
to make a satire to these giant and memorable predecessors, moreover in
this paper author are ongoing deﬁnitely and masterly to use these milestone
approaches created by those pioneers, but for needing to comment their ge-
ometric meaningfulness entirely. Another our task is let our solution more
general signiﬁcance.
But for the fact, we will not eventually solve all problems in this paper,
actually that is impossible and we deﬁnitely need much more theories to
support our works. Here we have to utilize the sample space, so that we can
use these small instances to reveal some attributes of computing on complex
system. Hence this is only a new beginning to solve this class problem by a
new universal approach.
Well, in this paper to expand these themes, author will strictly be on
the way with respected to such procedure: introducing these algorithms;
raising up a conclusion and proof; examine the conclusion with trials; we
might insert some contents about optimized method; ﬁnally issue discussion
to ﬁnish this loop.
2
Preliminary
Primarily, we reserve some conventional characters, letters n, m, V and G.
Well, while we say a graph or instance, it may be represented by the form
G “ pV, τq[1], which we denote the collection of instance endpoints by V
and having form n “ |V | to present the cardinality about set V . The Greek
letter τ is represented a binary relation among those endpoints, that if there
is a morphic arc from u to v, we can denote the arc by uτv or pu, vq P τ.
Thus we might make a set partition according upon this logical structure
with a Cartesian product spuq “ Rpuq ˆ Lpuq. For this data structure we
call unit subgraph[1], which ﬁgures a structure out to a star-tree image with
root to its own neighbors we call them leaves. They are surrounding root as
those targets to which, “arrows”are shot oﬀfrom root. At the encode level
the mathematical structure can be dealt to a 2 dimension array in memory
which the root may be an index. The letter m naturally is used to denote
the cardinality of a leaf collection like m “ |Lpuq|.
Otherwise, to above structure of unit subgraph, we either might describe
another structure as Cartesian product βpuq “ Lpuq ˆ Rpuq, which becomes
to the leaf shoot the root with arrow, we call visiting subgraph[1].
The relationship between the two structures might represent some dis-
tinct types of instance.
1. There is a uncertain state on instance, we name it mixed, likes

2

type simple.

In this paper, we will not particularly or strictly appoint a certain type for
instance, that it sounds as possible to satisfy the entry regarded to general
or universal meaning. But we need to claim that we merely study the ﬁnite
graph. Upon the above deﬁnition, the path in ﬁgure means a queue with
some distinct arcs having τi´1p2q “ τip1q for τi´1, τi in path.
If each arc on instance is ticked by numbers to present some certain
meanings, we call weighted ﬁgure, denoted by a triple array G “ pV, τ, Wq.
The phrase total weight is exclusively to mean a path P with the sum of
weight on each segment at it, which may be computed by the form.
WpPq “
N
ÿ
i“1
}wpτiq};
for P “ pτiqN
i“1.
(1)
Furthermore while we refer the optimal path from a source to a target on an
instance, the context means that there is a path in a path set with minimum
total weight, else the phrase shortest path means this item contains minimum
cardinality among those members from source to target. Of course, we can
further regard the fact that an extreme path might be classed to either one
amid two types or both two. Default, we regard these weights as positive
volume and greater than 0.
Graph Partition. We roughly depict the approach as making a homoge-
nous copy for instance, as if the method dispatches the endpoints to a group
ordinal components, we denoted by R “ priqk
i“1 : 1 ď k ď n, and we call the
component region. We might have the following forms to character it.
1. R Ď V and R “ priqk
i“1 : 1 ď k ď n;

Ş rj “ ∅for i ‰ j;

This partition structure issues a layout with several features: we might call
each endpoint in the ﬁrst region source; if there any endpoint disconnected
with sources, then it would be impossible to lay in any region made by
this method, thus this feature might take a condition to check a singleton
node in for whether it is in connected. So we need not specially claim the
connected attributer for an instance likes conventional statement. Likewise
3

if the ﬁrst region is a singleton component with an endpoint, then we can
prove the conclusion that there is at least a shortest path p between source
and another endpoint v as a target in ith region for 1 ă i ď k, there having
i ´ 1 “ |p|Pτ, at where we use the subscript term to say each member in
p is arc. The cardinality of path |p| by default still means the amount of
endpoints. The proof about the shortest path theorem is in the paper[1]. We
plan to introduce this algorithm in next section again, because it is nearly to
involve in the ergodic operation. The follow diagram shows the homogenous
copy made by partition method on the dodecahedron.
Figure 1
3
Algorithms
This section we introduce these algorithms, and ﬁrst one is graph partition.
Here if we observe the description of graph partition, we might sound that
for a unit subgraph such that the leaves would be departed to the fore,
current and later region. Consequently, if any leaf is dispatched to a region
amid them, then it should be in the complement of what the leaf collection
L diﬀer to other two regions. Thus we can let the program iteratively divide
the leaves to next region till not any leaf in leaf set for partition. We issue
the algorithm in following.
Table 1: Graph Partition Algorithm.
Input τ “ tsiun
i“1 for si “ Rpuq ˆ LPspuq.
Other Variables c “ 1; W Ð s, s is the source.
Output R “ priqkďn
i“1 .
001.
LOOP W ‰ ∅Do
002.

003.
α – pαzWqzrPRpc ´ 1q: rPRpc ´ 1q “ ∅if c ď 0;
004.
If α ‰ ∅Than W – α and c – c ` 1;
005.
Go to LOOP.
4

About the runtime complexity for this algorithm, however we can regard
the cardinality of a region as |r| “ λn for 0 ă λ ď 1, then the amount of
regions may be 1{λ, and the amount of leaves dabbling in a region might be
many of λnm. The program needs to remove those members oﬀit, which
have been in the fore and current regions, whose size both might be λn.
Therefore the complexity term might be λ2n2m, but for need to remove the
repeated members in practice, the term might be pλmnq2 eventually. Hence
the algorithm complexity is pλmnq2 ¨ p1{λq “ OpE2q for E “ mn.
Optimization.
If we further observe above operation carefully, then we
can identify the fact: each leaf set would be screened for only once. If we
have two hashed table to record the states for each leaf, including dispatch
and remove, then the program might save the time for the operations of
comparison jobs among those arrays. Of course we have to reform the label
on each endpoint to a group of continual natural number for compute the
oﬀset in array when program has the operation on those members. Here we
individually setup two hash tables T and T 1, and the partition algorithm
should be updated in following.
Table 2: Optimize Graph Partition Algorithm.
Input τ : |τ| “ n, τris “ LPspiq for i ą 0 and i P V .
Hash Tables T, T 1 : Tris “ T 1ris “ 0 and |T| “ |T 1| “ n;
Output R “ pyiqkďn
i“1 : yi P V .
001.
LOOP W ‰ ∅Do
002.

003.

004.

005.
If T 1rus “ 0 and Trus “ 0 Than r Ð u and T 1rus “ 1;
006.
End.
007.
End.
008.
If r ‰ ∅Than W – r and c – c ` 1;
009.
Go to LOOP
Because the operation of writing and reading on hash table is within Op1q,
when consider every leaf needs to query hash table T and T 1 for once and
update them for once, then the complexity term is Op4Eq for E “ mn.
5

Exploring. While the job of graph partition ends, we either have gained
an evident geometric layout. We merely need to concern these leaves in the
fore region for any root in addition to source, because if there is a visitor
wants to reach target v in the ith region from source u, then he absolutely
needs to pass through the therein certain one leaf in the fore region.
If
we stand at the target to view this progress, we will certainly select amid
fore-leaf which might take the total weight minimum for target. Along this
idea, in addition to source, by this same strategy we may screen those leaves
for their own roots from the second region iteratively till to the target and
its own region. Thus the progress may be viewed as an iterative process
to compute the minimum total weight for every path form source to those
endpoints. Here we can write the form to present this method.
wuPrj “
ď
min
pfpx, uq ` wxq
for fpx, uq P WPτ and x P pLPβpuq X rj´1q.
(2)
The algorithm is in following.
Table 3: Hybrid Algorithm.
Input
1.
τ : |τ| “ n, τris “ LPβpiq for i ą 0 and i P V ;
2.
WPτ “ pwiq: |wi| “ m and wirjs ą 0, it is weight table
3.
R “ pyiq: y1 “ s, it is graph partition
4.
TPV ris “ ti : 1 ď |TPV | ď n, node Ñ subscript of region
Output Σ, P : |Σ| “ |P| “ n and Σrss “ c;
001.
For i “ 2 Ñ |R| do
002.
u “ Rris, w “ 0, y “ 0;
003.

004.
If Trxs ă Trus and
(y “ 0 or (y ‰ 0 and w ą Σrxs ` Wrxsrus))
005.
Than w “ Σrxs ` Wrxsrus, y “ x;
006.
End.
007.
Σrus “ w, Prus “ y;
008.
End.
The program screens each member in any region without concerning their
ordinal in the region, and the ergodicity was along on the region queue in
6

partition.
In this progress, we used the visiting structure to gain leaves
and qualify them by querying hash table T to guarantee the each leaf we
interested had been in the fore region. Thus we employed a competitive
mechanism to pick up the winner, which could make total weight on the
root minimum.
The algorithm is to check n leaf-sets for precisely once. Moreover we
merely want to seek a leaf amid m members, thus we herein use the method
of bubble sorting for only m times comparison. Hence the complexity of al-
gorithm is Opmnq. But we must consider there is a query to the weight table
W for mn times within whole progress. The weight table is a 2 dimensions
array and it is a hash querying to gain a volume array by natural number
index which presenting a root. Thus the complexity of query weight table is
cm for once in the worst case, so the overall runtime complexity is OpcmEq
for E “ mn.
The following table exhibits those outcomes of practical runtime from our
trials, and the physics unit for measure outcome is microsecond in addition
to the option ‘k “’, which is the variable about the quantity of endpoints
on instance.1
Table 4: Practical Runtime on a Series of Objects
k “
G.P.
E.
T.T.
k “
G.P.
E.
T.T.
20
3.21
4.45
7.66
120
99.13
163.73
262.86
40
9.77
15.37
25.14
140
132.57
223.95
356.52
60
21.57
34.77
56.34
160
180.15
301.155
481.3
80
45.55
67.57
113.12
180
231.44
384.49
615.93
100
68.51
115.09
183.6
200
274.44
474.58
749.02
The options meaning are:
1. G.P. is the practical runtime for graph partition.
2. E. is the practical runtime for exploring model.
3. The ﬁnal T.T. is total number of the fore two items.
We plotted a curve diagram for an intuitive exhibition to present the relation
among the outcomes and relevance instances in above table.
1All programs were encoded by PHP5.0 and running on a laptop with i3-3217U 4 cores,
4G memory and Windows 8.1 OS
7

Figure 2
For the experiment object, we chose the square grid ﬁgure and the source we
speciﬁed was at a corner of instance, and for the target we selected the one
on the opposite corner to source at the diagonal. We let the variable k as
the number of many endpoints on a row or column, which on above diagram
the variable range lays on the vertical. Then we had not only the quantity
of endpoints on instance with n “ k2, but also the quantity of arcs might
be 4kpk ´ 1q. In this trial, the k value is in the range of 20 to 200, so that it
may be properly to say that they are representing these actual entries which
were in an array of square numbers p400, 1600, . . . , 4 ¨ 104q. Hence to the
curve, however to partition or exploring, they both showcased the variance
of quadratic form.
For example, the greatest number on the vertical is 10, which it means
the instance is containing 40 000 nodes and 159 200 arcs. The scale might
be enough to cover any biggest city on the current earth. I think you may
learn what signiﬁcance these numbers implied in practice to those ventures,
which items are about to vehicle navigation system.
4
Static System
To above algorithm, we might say it is a hybrid algorithm, and the new
approach only needs the features of ﬁnite for any instance as entry. Instead
of stating the connected attribute, because we might further use the graph
partition to qualify the instance. Now you can ﬁnd more similar methods
to other methods in this new approach, in special to Dijkstra’s algorithm[3],
Bellmanford’s algorithm[4], Floyd’s algorithm[5], Johnson’s algorithm[6] and
etc. Since the layout produced by graph partition, we might have a quali-
tative analysis about those contexts for these pioneers, namely we can com-
ment them in a geometric way.
To use Dijkstra’s algorithm, there someone deﬁnitely suggest you to pre-
pare a perfect directed graph with a few of endpoints, because the method
could not harness the visiting to nodes and perhaps turn back to source or
repeated segment on a mixed ﬁgure. To Bellmanford’s algorithm, we must
8

either prepare a group of rather crafted numbers for endpoints’ labels, which
we hope this namespace maybe correctly express some inside certain rela-
tionships, so that program could turn out an optimal result. In other word,
the calculation is build on a uncertain basis framework, hence there someone
maybe warn you that the entry ﬁgure has not got complex relationship, but
he cannot answer what is a complex relationship. Here we issue the most
representative contexts to express a common notion that these vague con-
texts actually are from a same source, the geometric layout, through they
have had so much distinct before. If you study Bellmanfords method on a
small sample, you can ﬁnd that the crafted numbers label just achieve such
idea which exploring along the level like on a tree structure.
The above graph partition approach provides a homogenous ﬁgure to
the instance, so that the intuitive geometry layout might properly emerge.
If we set the new ﬁgure as a network in a physics ﬁeld, and let the potential
stream ﬂows from source, passes through the interval regions and ﬁnally
stops at the target and its own region, we might naturally have each region
regarded as a nodes cluster at the contour line and its subscript likes to
label the energy gradient, the shortest path to target either may become the
shortest path of physics stream.
The above notion is the key to comment these prior approaches, but
we cannot deny them, that we have ever been attempting to seek out the
geometric meaning as well, till the ﬁeld layout appeared. So in this section,
we prime and thoroughly clarify these conceptions at logical level, and their
relationships to the new approach that we made. Looking at the following
table, which is a trial on a simple grid ﬁgure with n “ 52, at where source
and target are both on the opposite corners at the diagonal line.
Table 5: Outcomes of BOTS and EBOGP.
No.
Algorithm
Results
Loops
Time(ms)
1
BOTS
8 512
81 598
5 000
2
EBOGP
70
252
5.53
Look at the second row in the above table, the job of BOTS[1] algorithm
actually is used to search Hamilton path, which yet could enumerate all
possible connected paths among pairs source and target entirely. In the pa-
per [1], we have proved that each path p therein outcomes has 1 ď |p| ď n ,
if the entry is simple. To other hand, by the Dijkstra’s method we actually
seek the extreme total weight, nor concern the length, as if it seems to search
all possible and ﬁnd out the only one ideal result like BOTS method.
Even if the accuracy is strict, but for some numbers in above table, it
9

issues the accuracy is not whole story, nor even a critical role, because of
another factor about to computing resources. That is amazing for a small
number n “ 25 as a little entry, it has turned out a outcome, a large number
which there are 8 512 paths.
That is caused by combinative possibility,
likewise this is why you maybe ever before receive the warning about the
scale of entry for using Dijkstra’s algorithm, the warning was done since
that what only a small entry might quickly exhaust your entire computing
resource, often showing the case out of memory, and even not a method for
you to forewarn the crash.
For the second algorithm EBOGP[2], that author brieﬂy names it here.
This approach does the exploring job based on the layout of graph partition,
that has been introduced in the paper[2]. Nevertheless we can learn the scale
of outcome is only less than 10% to BOTS with k “ 5, but the complexity
is attributed to the factorial item about ?n. For a square grid instance, the
form Sp2k ´ 2, k ´ 1q[2] exactly presents the relationship between outcome
and entry, and the quantity of loops in program might be Sp2k, kq. Namely,
it said that growth still grips enough power to collapse any computer with
k just being a bit large number.
We denote the result set from EBOGP by REBOGP , that obviously it is
the subset of BOTS ones, which we denote by RBOTS. The set REBOGP is
particular to what it is the collection of all shortest paths from source to
target, for any instance. Therefore we have an idea to exam our new algo-
rithm, herein we call the new method Hybrid Dijkstra’s algorithm, that we
might have the abstracted sequence RHDA Ď REBOGP Ď RBOTS to discuss
the problem about the accuracy of outcomes yielded by these approaches.
Before our discussion, we must mention a major and critical conception
triangle inequality[7]. We popularize this inception to polygon, that there
is a deﬁnition as follow:
Deﬁnition 1. Let A be a collection A “ txiuně3

natural number M with 3 ď M ď n. Let M “ m1 ` m2 with m1, m2 ą 0. If
there are two subsets a1, a2 Ď A with m1 “ |a1| and m2 “ |a2|, we call they
satisfy polygon inequality relationship, if and only if
m1 ď m2 ðñ ř
Pa1 xi ď ř
Pa2 xj.
Otherwise we call anti polygon inequality relationship for ř
Pa1 xi ą ř
Pa2 xj.
For our notion, the inequality relationship depictures the fact that we assume
there is an instance of polygon with a source and a target on it, if we ﬁnd the
shortest path from source to target, then it similarly might be the optimal
one based on the polygon inequality relationship. By this rule support, we
can deem the optimal path amid those members in set REBOGP either is
that global one on instance, hence we may focus on the problem that how
10

the outcome of hybrid approach is. Here, we ﬁrstly focus on the case for
all weights on instance equal to a unique constant, so we might prove the
inference as follow.
Inference 1. Give a ﬁnite weighted instance G “ pV, τ, Wq. Let the parti-
tion R on it with R “ priqk
i“1. Consider two endpoints u, v with u P r1 and
|r1| “ 1, let v in another region with v P ri for 1 ă i ď k. For any shortest
path p from the source u to target v, such that it is an optimal path from u
to v, if and only if all the weights on G are equal.
Proof. According to the above-given conditions, we let the shortest path p “
pxsqi
s“1 with x1 “ u and xi “ v. We can conclude its length has i´1 “ |p|Pτ
by the shortest path theorem of graph partition[1]. It is obvious to compute
a total weight for p by above form(1), having wppq “ ř
1ďsďi´1 ws. We let
there is another connected path p1 from source to target with |p1| “ i1 ě i. It
is obvious that if the whole weights are equal to a constant c, we can present
their relationship like that cpi1 ´ 1q ě cpi ´ 1q, or else we can always tick
distinct weights to turn out a converse unless there is only path p between
them. Hence this inference holds.
This inference showcases a fact that set REBOGP not only is the collection
of shortest path and, but for likewise it is the collection of all optimal paths
too, if and only if whole weights are an identical constant. Furthermore the
feature implies that the perfect result most possibly lays in the set REBOGP
if the polygon inequality relationship is a popular law in ﬁgure. The case
in this inference may be rather extreme, so we can regard it as a boundary
on the density and cardinality, as two key criteria to be the characteristics
of data structure of those weights in a complex system. For example the
density of all weights is so tiny that they are approaching to equal, thus the
density may decide the outcome in a sense way, beside cardinality.
Meanwhile beside the Bellmanford’s algorithm, its exploring is just stage
by stage along the levels in instance likes hybrid approach does among re-
gions. Certainly the Bellmanford’s algorithm need a group of crafted labels
to tick those endpoints to guarantee operation does at the correct orbits, so
as to this request complicates the job of encoding and it is hard to seek out
the inside and fatal logical error. But for hybrid method, this burdensome
job has been dismissed. This is the reason that why author called this new
approach hybrid, which it is a synthesis of those advance ideas in pioneers,
any way to avoid their various drawbacks since clear geometry layout.
Any way we need have further to prove the statement that this hybrid
method could produce a path and it would be the optimal result in collection
REBOGP if and only if entire weights are of ﬁxed and the their numbers are
11

arbitrary2.
Theorem 1. Give a ﬁnite weighted instance G “ pV, τ, Wq. We let a graph
partition R “ priqk
i“1 on it. Consider an endpoint u being a source in the
ﬁrst region which is a singleton one. Let an endpoint v in other ith region
as target. If the hybrid approach is used to explore the path among u and v,
then the method merely yields a shortest path among them.
Proof. Link to the above precondition, for the hybrid algorithm, the opera-
tion might pick up a leaf x P LPβpvq for root v underlying visiting structure
β, if and only if the leaf make the total weight wv at root v is less than other
leaves. In the above program, we let an array P to gather the leaf x for root
v as output, which data structure is presenting Prvs “ x. The data struc-
ture shows a logical relation: there is only an arc link to v from x, so that
we are certainly ongoing to conclude the fact that the endpoint x similarly
has iteratively got an arc reﬂect to itself from a fore-leaf, till to end at the
source u by the precondition for ﬁrst region is the singleton. Meanwhile we
can counter the length of the tracing stage is i ´ 1. So this tracing process
with a recursive feature has a virtual inverse link to source u from target v,
at where we can assume that the virtual link is connected to an endpoint
t in jth region with j ą 1 and stops there. As well when we query root t
for its own fore-leaf in the array P, we might have the contradiction that
there is a fore-leaf for root t stay in pj ´ 1qth region recording in array P,
not coincide to our above assumption. Hence we prove therein outcome, at
least there is a path connect target from source. Actually we also prove all
endpoints are targets in addition to source, certainly the source either may
be the empty-node’s target.
We assume a case again that there is another path p1 from source to
target in the cutting graph which has been depictured by array P. Any way
the case means either target or a medium endpoint should be the common
node on fork about two paths p and p1, so that it always lets this common
node have two fore-leaves in array P, and contradict, hence the case does
not exist. We prove that underlying this data structure amid outcomes, the
hybrid method just produces a unique result for a given pairs source and
target.
We can let a path length greater than i ´ 1, which links to target by the
later-leaf y. It is obvious that it violates the logical structure of P. Likewise
to the endpoint y as a root in array P, which the amount of fore-leaf is only
equal to 1. Hence there is no such path in cutting graph and we prove the
only one result has to be the shortest path, this theorem holds.
2Please note that: here is not to say the result is the optimal to set RBOT S. About
this issue, we will sound it in later section
12

By the above theorem, we can learn the fact that the data array P ﬁgures
out the new cutting ﬁgure as a tree, where the tree root is source 3. Any
way, we have proved the notion RHDA Ď REBOGP , that the hybrid approach
can make only one shortest path for a source to whole others. So we have
to answer the question: whether the result made by hybrid algorithm is the
optimal one among those opponents in set REBOGP . The conclusion and its
proof are in following.
Theorem 2. Give a ﬁnite weighted instance G “ pV, τ, Wq. We let a graph
partition R “ priqk
i“1 on it. Consider an endpoint u being a source in the
ﬁrst region which is a singleton one. Let an endpoint v in other ith region.
If the shortest path collection REBOGP pu, vq is non-empty, then the result p
made by hybrid approach has the minimum total weight in it.
Proof. To those above-conditions, we let path p be made by hybrid approach
from u to v. It is obvious for the conclusion to naturally hold, if and only
if the cardinality of set REBOGP pu, vq is only one. So we let it greater than
1. Consider the target in the second region, that it has not any choice but
for source as only one fore-leaf. Hence the conclusion might hold in the fore
context.
Consider there are i ě 2, and |REBOGP pu, vq| ě 2, By the competitive
mechanism described by form(2), for those endpoints in 3rd region, we can
prove their total weight recorded in array Σ are minimum among their own
fore-leaves respectively. It is obvious to employ the induction principle to
prove the case similarly appears at target v iteratively.
By theorem 1 we prove there is only one shortest path between source
and target, which lays in array P, hence this theorem holds.
This theorem 2 eventually proves the new hybrid method is an exact solution
to reveal optimal path for static weighted ﬁgure under the wing of polygon
inequality. But in the real world, always there is someone to draw out a
path on instance to make a counter example. Likewise, this also is not a
hard thing for you to draw a Hamiltonian path and merely tick minimum
weights on each segment to debate this method.
This absolutely boring path issues a question: if we regard a complex
system as that there a mechanism stochastically assigns some numbers to
whole arcs, then we might along this idea to study this complex system how
about the stochastic probability to anti polygon inequality, we here call it
anti event simply.
So that we always might imagine a complex system like that there has a
number array used to assign its own members to a ﬁgure. At the intuitive
3But it is not a minimum span tree, that need you note.
13

notion, we at least deem the anti event is involving to the number array and
those weights distribution on the ﬁgure. For to clarify the problem, we issue
an example.
Example.
Given a natural number array A “ taiun
i“1 : ai “ i for as-
signment and consider a polygon ∆“ peiqtě3
i“1. We ﬁrstly let t “ 3, so that
there are these operations: while we select three numbers x1, x2, y from ar-
ray A and assign them to those edges e1, e2, e3 respectively on polygon ∆as
weights, if there is x1 ` x2 ă y , we would deem the anti event inevitably
happens, here we regard the edge e3 with number y as the shortest path.
For the variable y, its domain has to be in r2, ns, due to the max number
in array A is n. And since that, beside the two other items on left side
of above inequality, such that the number n{2 is a label for their domains,
which means they might not both likewise equal to and greater than this
label; if so, their sum would greater than n so as to the anti event should
never appear.
We consider the case x1 ‰ x2 primarily.
Along the fore
line, variable x1 has such domain x1 “ r1, pn ´ 1q{2s, since that followed
there may be domains and relationships among three variables respectively
in following.
x1 “ i ùñ x2 “ ri ` 1, n ´ i ´ 1s
for i “ r1, n{2s
ùñ y “ ri ` x2 ` 1, ns.
Then the total possibility for x1 equal to a certain volume i will be
ppiq “
N´1
ÿ
x“i`1
n ´ pi ` x ` 1q ` 1
for N “ n ´ i;
“
N´1
ÿ
x“i`1
N ´ x.
Therefore the sum of total possibility for i “ r1, n{2s is
P “
Tÿ
i“1
ppiq “
Tÿ
i“1
N´1
ÿ
x“i`1
N ´ x
for T “ pn ´ 1q{2, N “ n ´ i.
We have
14

P “ pp1q ` pp2q ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` ppTq
“ pn ´ 3q ` pn ´ 4q ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` 1`
pn ´ 5q ` pn ´ 6q ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` 1`
...
` 1
Finally the succinct form is
P “ pn ´ 2qpn ´ 3q
2
` pn ´ 3qpn ´ 4q
2
` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` 1.
While the form is divided by combinational form Spn, 3q we have
ρ “ P
C3n
“ 3
ˆ pn ´ 2qpn ´ 3q
npn ´ 1qpn ´ 2q ` pn ´ 3qpn ´ 4q
npn ´ 1qpn ´ 2q ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` 1
P 3n
˙
“ 3
nϕ
for ϕ “
ˆpn ´ 2qpn ´ 3q
pn ´ 1qpn ´ 2q ` pn ´ 3qpn ´ 4q
pn ´ 1qpn ´ 2q ` ¨ ¨ ¨ `
1
P 2
n´1
˙
.
(3)
For the above term, we consider the array ϕ is convergence towards to 0
while the variable n toward to inﬁnite, we denote the term by ρ3, so that
we can deem the probability on the triangle surely tends to a constant, an
extremal value. But we only ﬁnish the job to pick up three numbers. But
while we plan to assign them to those edges on a triangle ∆, the probability
would be ρ3{3 for assignment the greatest number y to segment e3. This
example demonstrates that the probability of anti event either involves the
quantity of those edges on polygon ∆.
Second for the case x1 “ x2 such that having x1 ` x2 “ p2, 4, . . . , kq for
k “ n ´ 2 if n is an even number otherwise k “ n ´ 1. Then with the above
same fashion we have
P 1 “ pn ´ 2q ` pn ´ 4q ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` 1.
Then
ρ1 “
P 1
Spn, 3q « 3
n.
Of course while the n tends toward to inﬁnity, the probability ρ1 is toward to
0. Thus here we might only interest the case of x1 ‰ x2, which is approaching
15

to 0.48, but for the case of assigning the greatest number amid three ones to
edge e3, that volume either becomes near to 0.17 that ρ3 divided by Sp3, 1q.
As well the simple conclusion should be in a strict context of choosing
numbers from assignment array. It shows the case that the anti event either
is not more popular than its opponent. But we have to recognize the fact that
there is not any more theory about the probability of anti event. In general,
the current theory also refers to the case only for one-to-many model, so
that we inevitably suﬀer an embarrassing aﬀair that we study or proﬁle the
problem is merely depending on through the intuitive sample space.
We had a simulated trial with several arguments: a natural number array
A; the letter E presented the amount of edges on a polygon; our experiment
was designed to that we randomly got E numbers from the array A and
randomly dispatched them to two groups to have their respective sums and
cardinalities compare. According to the deﬁnition of anti event, we could
identify whether the anti event happened between the two groups data.
We would let amid one as a shortest path whose length was represented
by its own cardinality. Our testing had its length to another longer path
done from 1 to E{2 ´ 1 if E was a even number, otherwise pE ´ 1q{2. The
testing was repeatedly done for 1 000 times, where for every time, we counter
each anti event on distinct cardinality of the shortest group. Eventually we
gained a group of volumes upon various lengths to respective percentages.
In practical trial, we initialize them as A “ 1, 2, . . . , 170 and E “ 169. We
plotted the histogram to show the outcome in following.
Figure 3: Polygon Inequality Probability
For the above diagram, when the length exceeded 70, the anti event began
to appear. Namely the anti event is a small probability case while the length
of simulated shortest path was less than 70. But for the length being 84 near
to half of 169, the probability was near to 11%. From this trial, we might
gain a knowing about what the anti event appears in a high frequency is
mostly to involve the case, which two cardinalities of groups are near to each
other.
If we imagine the ﬁgure in practice is constructed by many distinct poly-
gons, we might deem the fact that to a shortest path made by hybrid method,
16

the anti event easily happens due to these paths with an approaching length.
Thus we have to interest the severity about the inﬂuence of anti event to
accuracy and seek a way to solve it, else in the application, the top prob-
ability of anti event in this trial is 10.4% less than the triangle with three
edges. So we want to learn the relationship among the probability of anti
event to the scale increasing on a weighted ﬁgure. In following portion, we
will have along on the tendency of the fore idea to do another experiment.
Greedy Idea Trials. We designed a trial with a seriese objects by us-
ing greedy idea attempt to remove the anti event. We chose a group of grid
instances as objects for our trial, that is k “ 5, 10, 15, . . . , 50, which end-
points quantity n was in range r25, 2500s as to form n “ k2. We let these
members in array A be randomly assigned to each arc on ﬁgure as a ﬁxed
weight. We might let A “ p1, 2, 3, . . . , kq , certainly the cardinality of array
A was k and, for this assignment operation we call regular assignment.
We designed an algorithm that we sorted those arcs’ weights as a queue w
in the ascent. Then after, we initialized an empty instance g without any arc
or endpoint. We took some arcs oﬀfor once to draw on the instance g, which
their weights are in the front range of positions in array w. This progress was
iteratively to cut the original ﬁgure to build up the new ﬁgure g again and
again till a condition was satisﬁed after we ﬁnished drawing a strain arcs:
the new partition σ Ď g contains the source and target both. Of course
the case presents source connect with the target. Then we performed the
hybrid method to search the optimal path for source and target. Through
this method, we wanted to screen some arcs out with less weight to piece
up a proper ﬁgure, that guided by greed idea, we always deem the optimal
path should be organized by those nice arcs and in most probability, it is
properly laying in such instance likes σ.
Figure 4th is regular, 5th is nornal.
We compared the outcomes produced by the two approaches in regular as-
signment. We brieﬂy call the new approach greedy hybrid approach. The
above histogram visually demonstrates the relationships among those out-
comes with those gray pillars.
For a pair pillars on each number at the
horizon, the left pillar with deep-high light grades is showing the contrast
about two paths’ lengths made by two approaches respectively, which the
deep gray area means the rating of greedy one longer than the hybrids, or
17

else the high light area says the equal relation. This expression either suits
to the right pillar for about the comparison of two total weights at target.
But yet note the tiny black area, it is showing the less than relation, where
the greedy one is winner. The outcomes were upon testing 1 000 times for
each volume on horizon.
The trial issues the case that although we strived to ﬁlter some greater
weights, but the utility did not mend even more, which on above diagram
the rating changing has shown the outcome oﬀ. This solution depending on
through each arc to restrain the anti event happen is obvious in failure, at
least said on grid ﬁgure. Maybe for the cardinality of set REBOGP could be
Sp2k ´ 2, k ´ 1q for variable k, the outcomes present a factorial increasing
might take the probability of anti event fall down. At least author deems
through this trial, this case shows the anti event as a critical key impact to
take a decision in failure on employing greed method.
Figure 6,7
We had continued to do some experiments by altering density in assignment
array. They respectively were normal type, dumbbell-shape type and the
gap being random. Those histograms are listed above, and they are com-
monly showing the greedy approach cannot be in leading to the hybrid one,
however on length or accuracy. Eventually we can say using greedy method
on the side of entry might mend the accuracy in a small probability.
Summary. We played our strategy on two stages, and eventually we gained
a unique outcome which is not only shortest path but also an optimal one
among those members in set REBOGP . We might issue the strict context of
this method, that under the circumstance of with least cardinality of nodes,
the method can achieves an ergodicity to satisfy an extreme condition of
weighted request. Here we do not mention which an extreme condition. In
fact, if we only alter the operation sign in above program, we can reform the
exploring job to search the maximum total weight. In other words, we hold
the selection criteria so as to the word optimal has more popular meanings.
We ever use the greedy method in our solution, but we only seek out the
drawback of greed idea in our strategy. About the problem of seeking out
an extreme accuracy, we will issue the involving contents in later section.
Since that, through our above conclusion, does it mean the EBOGP
approach might be ignored? Here we only discussed the case about ﬁxed
18

weighted ﬁgure, although there numbers are randomly dispatched to each
arc. If we use the hybrid approach in a dynamical system, we would suﬀer
the problem that how to exam the only one result is what, even to determin-
ing whether it is an acceptable volume or not. At least author deems this is
a massive embarrassment that the prior methods suﬀered. Eventually they
had not any agency to trial and avail their results, so as to there were any
more choices, and they had tragic to stop at the static system for decades.
5
Exploing in Dynamical System
Dynamical system[8] is an indeﬁnite thing hard to be ﬁgured out by natural
language or mathematical language entirely.
Here we will not dabble in
much more at the hand of deﬁnition or attribute. We will deﬁne a simple
dynamical system, that for each weighted arc pu, vq, on it the weight is
determined by the form wpu, vq “ fpv, Iq, which means any weight on each
arc is produced by function, no longer in ﬁxed status and there are many
possible values. So we can design the variable I might be the sum of each
ﬁxed index on respective arc. At least if we use a group numbers to assign
these index and weight table randomly, we might make such uncertain factor
for each weight: although the volumes of index and total weight will increase
along with the path length growth. But on the concrete case of querying
weight table for a weight with an arc as amid entry, to a target and its own
fore-leaf, although it is same leaf, but for some distinct paths stop there,
such that we cannot conﬁrm the queried outcomes equal or unequal about
their respective total index.
Deﬁnition 2. For the total weight on endpoint t might be recursively claimed
by following forms.
1. It “ c1, wt “ c2; if t is the source, the index and weight are constants.
2. It “ Is ` Ips,tq for Ips,tq P DPτ and ps, tq P τ;
3. wt “ wx ` fpt, Itq for x P LPβptq and f P W;
This deﬁnition demonstrates how to gain a dynamical weight on any arc.
Here actually we just alter the name and utility of weight table which was
in above static system, instead of storage the ﬁxed indices for each arc. The
progress merely adds an operation for query the weight table than in static
system. So the runtime complexity about method should be unchanged.
Beside the hybrid approach, while we have the shortest path set REBOGP ,
we can compute all paths in it and seek out the optimal one. Instead, we
cannot do that because there may have a request about computed resource
at factorial increasing. On the other hand, at least on recent, the grid ﬁgure
19

is the only one whom we might learn the amount of shortest path for given
any pair of source and target on this type instance, through combinational
theory. Not also mention those weird instances, we deﬁnitely cannot value
the scale of outcome by a certain method before start our computed task.
That is why author always used this type ﬁgure, although the EBOGP is a
naive approach. Therefore at least on a small sample, we can utilize trials to
exam the hybrid approach and attempt to reveal some interior features on
the complex system, that sample space also is a critical importance mathe-
matical method. This is just the reason that the accuracy made by EBOGP
has absolutely exact, so that we have comparative trial about upon two
methods to study algorithms and complex system.
Experiment Design. We let two number arrays d and w as assignment
array for index table D and weight table W respectively, which all numbers
in them are positive greater than 0. We use two arrays to do stochastic as-
signment job. According to the above deﬁnition about dynamic, we design
a plan for trial: at ﬁrst we will test the hybrid approach in such dynam-
ical system, and then after to perform the EBOGP approach to produce
the set REBOGP and for whole shortest paths to cast their own respective
total weights. As well we would sort these outcomes as ascent and remove
those repeated numbers out, so that we may produce an ordinal sequence
X with X “ pxiqN
i“1 for i ă j ñ xi ă xj. Then we can observe the rating of
hybrid result in set X, the position in sequence X. At the next stage, what
we need further to do is recording the information about those ratings for
study accuracy and system. There are several arguments in following, and
they need to be in our attention.
1. The variable k, here we let k “ 10 and ﬁx it.
2. Let assignment array d “ tdiuk
i“1 : di “ i.
3. The assignment array w “ twiuN
i“1 : wi “ i has a variance cardinality.
4. The 1st outcome is the top number, which is the statistic percentage
of hybrid result being on the 1st position after T times testing.
5. The 2nd outcome is the worst position to label the greatest position
therein T results.
6. The 3rd outcome is the average status. After T times testing, we can
gather two groups data. We let the ﬁrst group α contains T volumes
of position made by hybrid method, likewise to second group β, each
member is the amount of sorted total weights made by EBOGPs for
each testing. Therefore we can have the ratio about their average as
δ “ α{β.
20

We plotted those arguments in following diagram.
Figure 8
On the x-axis, a unit is 2k to present the rise of cardinality for array w.
And these gray pillars show the β values upon distinct cardinality of array
w, indeed, we might observe it increases according to linear along with the
number on horizon. Instead, for three broken lines of worst position, top
number and average status, as if there seems to have no more relationships
among them.
But here are some interesting things enough to encourage
us: for that the worst position, at least it is less than 30%. For general
score system, we often use 5 rating to assess an case within excellent, good,
ordinary, bad and worse. There in the worst case the outcome is still to keep
in good degree. Either to those members in α group, the data distribution
was not a normal type as well, which the quantity of occupying the 1st
position often was the most amid outcomes. Note the average status line
presents a moderately drooping to horizon, for the case we can deem it
represents a tendency that for the cardinality of weights in system toward
to a large number maybe compensate certain drawback in hybrid progress, or
the accuracy maybe ongoing in improvement along with weight cardinality
rise. Of course, these notions need much more evidences to support.
Change Density. In above trials, we used a natural number array w with
the gap among neighbors being same and identical to 1, which we can say
the density about array w be even. As well we changed the density and
let it greater than 1 and continued to test this case, so that we can further
observe the gap how to inﬂuence the outcomes.
Herein we let array w as w “ pwiqN
i“1 : wi “ c ¨ i. We employed four
distinct gaps on it and let c be 1,2,3,4 respectively and only drew their
average status lines. The diagram is in following.
21

Figure 9
We can ﬁnd that the case has extremely changed when the c “ 4. It shows
much more oﬀin plain and near to horizon than others, and there are
many more results on top position. The case of enlarging gap alters our
anticipation throughout that it made an approaching qualitative change.
Particularly we let c “ 5, all results were on top position. This took us back
to the static system and theorem 2 as well. Here we brieﬂy call the case
dynamical regularization, it said that a dynamical system is presenting to a
static system for calculation.
For above case, a question has been emerged: is there any critical switch
to let the instance turn to regularization upon hybrid method? We designed
an exclusive trial to survey the case of dynamical regularization upon chang-
ing the density and cardinality of array w.
The testing object kept still. We let a number array Y in front of the
array w and Y “ pyiqt
i“1 : yi “ i and it had a job to randomly assign its
members to w, so as to take the gap in array w to irregular. Afterword the
program further randomly dispatched those numbers to weight table W from
array w. Therefore our trial turned out a relationship among two arguments,
which they are the cardinalities about two arrays Y and w respectively. If
each result be on top position for T times testing, we could have the ratio
of η “ |Y |{|w|, so that we plotted the broken lines about this ratio.
Figure 10
22

On the x-axis, the unit number is the cardinality about Y . the upper line is
η and the below one is log10 η, that dealing can make the line to more plain.
Two dash lines are their average horizon. Indeed, the diagram seems to
demonstrate a critical argument for the instance, for argument η, we might
use the form pwmax ´ wminq{|w| instead of the above form to express the
approaching meaning for cast it. That lets us might use a simple method to
evaluate the accuracy made by the hybrid approach, moreover we can like-
wise utilize it to investigate the complexity of system. For example, we can
survey a concrete instance and obtain a relationship about this argument
and the data distribution in the system, so that we might gain an overall
score in real time for govern system.
Discussion.
For above contents, we actually reported a group of trials
to exhibit how to calculate a dynamical system. But for much more con-
crete instance, indeed we must have to announce that we merely exhibited
an essential framework. For example, the whole weights in above dynamical
system have been known, maybe in practice they are of uncertain. In this
section, some arguments still are same as what were described in the static
system, which contains the scale of data, the density and ﬁgure. Eventually,
our research line was similar to partial derivative for some variables being
frozen. The notion must be emphasized that the veriﬁcation method we
developed in the general sense takes our research work ﬁnish in the range
of dynamical system. In particular, we even could not ﬁnd out the case
of dynamical regularization without the avail of EBOGP method, any way
it is hard to imagine before, that in a chaos system we either obtained an
outcome likes in static system.
Turn back to the core theme, how to value the accuracy of outcomes
made by hybrid method in a dynamical system. Frankly it said there is not
any theories to support our trials and assumptions, thus our solution is just
said that we stand at the highland of shortest path and work under a wing,
where the case of polygon inequality relationship may be popular in system.
On the other hand, it seems to be no worth for sought the absolutely optimal
path in the dynamical system. Why? For the above example, any index does
not mean the many of a weight on an arc which case we said uncertain. At a
extreme notion, although we seek all paths out, the outcome is also possible
not in exact because the uncertain factor maybe request the exploring job
need include all trails which may contains circuits made of repeated paths.
Hence the job becomes insigniﬁcance however for computing resources or
task own.
We must say that in last trial, it seems to divulge the dynamical system
actually is a collection of static system with a temporal dimension. A ques-
tion has been raised that is there a characteristics value in such dynamical
system? If it exists, then we how to describe these relationships among den-
23

sity, the scale of data and the ﬁgure? Thus we still need to survey many
more distinct instances for more evidences.
6
Optimizing Accuracy
We have issued the rule above that the accuracy is relative to anti event in
static system. But it is obstacle that how the program detects whether the
anti event happens and in where, however we cannot perform the BOTS to
demonstrate all possible. By the theorem 2, we can ﬁnd that the poten-
tial optimal path must be longer than the result made by hybrid method.
Namely, there always possibly is a more suitable leaf in the native or later re-
gion. Instead, the ﬁrst exploring amid those fore-leaves might be just viewed
as an initial step. In addition to source, we might promote each endpoint to
evolve by its own through screening all ownership leaves and their weights,
not qualify those in which regions.
The program can iteratively circularly update the arrays T and P, till not
any total weight no longer be sought out to change again, said the evolution
stops. In fact, the new method merely enlarges the search range than hybrid
approach, that on encode level the rest portion is not changed. We use a
form to present the logic on this step.
wu “ min Ť
Pβ pwx ` wpx, uqq for x P LPβpuq and wpx, uq P WPτ.
This method has got a useful idea to overcome the anti event in application
any way.
In our real world, sometimes the shortest path maybe implies
worse in some cases. For example there is a block’s traﬃc in jam and you
are unfortunately to be ready to pass through that block as your previous
plan. At this time, you must want to escape this under-nose nut through
invoking overall traﬃc resources. Namely, your car needs to detour to other
nice roads. This is a vivid example for anti event.
On strategy level, we solve this problem upon three stages: ﬁrstly use
partition to reveal the geometry layout; second seek an optimal path among
those shortest paths; third overcome the possible anti event by each node in
a sustainable evolution.
If we stand at the accuracy level, we could ﬁnd the new method likely
seems to achieve an extreme exact in static system and perhaps in dynamical
system. But we either lack more proper evidence to stand this proposal.
Author had done some trials to compare with hybrid approach. The prime
problem is that the degree of overall improvement is not more than 5%. Else
for this method there is a drawback about runtime complexity, so as to we
say it is not matured for this reason. Although the new method is actually
to iteratively invoke the similar exploring model to promote those endpoints
in evolution, but we cannot value the iterative times. Through trials we
24

only said the quantity involving to n, since that the algorithm complexity
may be Opmn2q only if the operation of querying weight table is a constant.
On a popular sense, the method can take each endpoint in a sustainable
evolution[9] by a group criterion, we call it evolutionary hybrid Dijkstra’s
algorithm.
7
Summary
In this paper, we introduced a universal solution to solve an ancient problem.
All key points should be focused on the geometry layout. Well, we likewise
used this idea to seek out the importance concept in our theoretical system,
which is the polygon inequality. As well we even further found it was critical
factor to inﬂuence the process of decision in greedy idea. This is a big harvest
for us, but we have to recognize the fact that though this method has been
at the frontline, but there still lack even more theories and trials to stand it
and takes it completely matured.
At the encode level, we eventually govern the decision stream pass through
those nodes and optimize that algorithm, so that we might get rid of the
domination from black-box program, moreover we utilized a universal method
to compute for dynamical system, and study the system to obtain various
conclusions from trials.
What we need to emphasize is the context about this solution, it must
be upon the least nodes and then to obtain an extreme result. Yes, you can
reform algorithm to obtain other class outcome by altering some criteria.
Note that for evolutionary hybrid Dijkstra’s algorithm, you must be careful
to select your strategy, because to a monotonic function, an extreme crite-
rion perhaps means the outcome towards to inﬁnity, which possible takes
program into an endless loop and data overﬁll memory.
8
Future Works
At least author deem we must clarify the complexity of evolutionary algo-
rithm to take it mature. Then after we can do even more trials to reveal
more exactly features of complex system, special to dynamical system. Our
goal is through more evidences to proﬁle some essential principles to sup-
port our application and theory. Meanwhile we can deﬁne various concrete
instances and let our research job in a correct way.
Application. It is natural thing to pour this idea into robots OS to deal
the smart commute in a complex environment. For example, when a self-
driving vehicle commutes in a city, he might record the data of traﬃc state
for each road. This case likes our trial for dynamical system, while he has
25

task in commute, he can plot an optimal lane depending on his memory
about traﬃc, and share the information among his crew at once.
Another case is the robots roaming in a narrow space. They must avoid
such state happen, which they jam several channels, but for other channels
either are idle. That said when a serve plans a crew touring in this narrow
space, he has to view somewhere as resources for commute job.
He can
demand each crew member need to apply to him for using some resources,
and estimate the lane for each applicant with the reserve table which other
members have been checked in previously.
Even to the array P and array T, they depict a layout likes a tree under
some criterions. The only entrance is the source, so we can view this layout is
a service network according to certain policy. For example, this topological
layout might describe a plenty of servers distribution for cloud computing,
a cryptosystem or an abstracted coding or compiling system. Summarily it
represents an optimized layout abstracted from original deﬁned ﬁgure. And
the layout can be changed by diﬀerence entrance and relationship deﬁnition
for nodes.
