Towards Semantic Integration of Heterogeneous Sensor
Data with Indigenous Knowledge for Drought Forecasting
Adeyinka K. Akanbi
Department of Information Technology
Central University of Technology
Free State, South Africa

Muthoni Masinde
Department of Information Technology
Central University of Technology
Free State, South Africa

ABSTRACT
In the Internet of Things (IoT) domain, various hetero-
geneous ubiquitous devices would be able to connect and
communicate with each other seamlessly, irrespective of the
domain. Semantic representation of data through detailed
standardized annotation has shown to improve the integra-
tion of the interconnected heterogeneous devices. However,
the semantic representation of these heterogeneous data sources
for environmental monitoring systems is not yet well sup-
ported. To achieve the maximum beneﬁts of IoT for drought
forecasting, a dedicated semantic middleware solution is re-
quired. This research proposes a middleware that semanti-
cally represents and integrates heterogeneous data sources
with indigenous knowledge based on a uniﬁed ontology for
an accurate IoT-based drought early warning system (DEWS).
CCS Concepts
•Software and its engineering →Message oriented
middleware; Semantics; •Information systems →Sen-
sor networks; Web data description languages;
Keywords
Internet of Things, Semantic Middleware, Semantic Integra-
tion, Interoperability, Drought Forecasting, Ontology
1.
INTRODUCTION
There are many ways humans observe the dynamic change
in environmental phenomena of the real world, even though
it is mostly short seasonal forecast. We may argue that it
is eﬀective to a certain degree. However, accurately fore-
casting a dynamic environmental event such as drought will
involve the use of interconnected remote devices such as
sensors to measure the environmental parameters.
Tech-
nological advancement in Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN)
has facilitated its use in environmental monitoring, habitat
monitoring and tsunami warning systems [3].
WSNs are
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-2138-9.
DOI: 10.1145/1235
networks of interconnected sensors that monitor environ-
mental phenomena in geographic space irrespective of the
topographical location.
They have become an invaluable
component of realizing an IoT-based environmental moni-
toring system; they form the ’digital skin’ through which to
’sense’ and collect the context of the surroundings and pro-
vides information on the process leading to events such as
drought and weather changes. However, these environmen-
tal properties are measured by various heterogeneous sen-
sors of diﬀerent modalities in distributed locations making
up the WSN, using diﬀerent terms in most cases to denote
the same observed property [10], [1], [5].
Also, informa-
tion communities often use abstruse terms and vocabulary
to categorize events [12]. These causes data heterogeneity
problem, classiﬁed into naming heterogeneity and cognitive
heterogeneity [11]. For example, water level property name
is ’Hoehe’ (in German) or ’Stav’ (in Czech). This is a ma-
jor challenge hampering the realization of WSN solutions for
environmental monitoring and consequently IoT, and causes
lack of seamless data sharing and full integration of inter-
connected heterogeneous ubiquitous devices.
In recent years, scientists have started to investigate how
to forecast a drought event accurately.
This is necessary
in order to mitigate the disastrous eﬀect of drought in a
particular geographic area.
However, environmental phe-
nomena such as droughts are complex.
They evolve over
space and time. According to [19], the greatest challenge is
designing a framework which can track information about
the ’what’, ’where’ and ’when’ of environmental phenom-
ena and the representation of the various dynamic aspects
of the phenomena. The representation of such phenomena
requires better understanding of the ’process’ that leads to
the ’event’. For example, a soil moisture sensor provides
sets of values for the observed property soil moisture. The
measured property can also be inﬂuenced by the tempera-
ture heat index
measured over the observed period. This
makes accurate prediction based on these sensor values al-
most impossible without understanding the semantics and
relationships that exist between these various properties, be-
cause various processes can lead to an environmental event
such as drought. Moreover, research [16], [13] on indigenous
knowledge (IK) on droughts has pointed to the fact that IK,
e.g., on worms like sifennefene worms and plants like the
mutiga tree1 can indicate drier or wetter conditions, which
can imply the likely occurrence of drought event over time
[20]. This scenario shows that environmental events can be
inferred from sensors’ data, if proper semantic meaning is
1A tree indigenous to South Africa
arXiv:1601.01920v1  [cs.AI]  8 Jan 2016

attached to it and augmented with some set of indicators
derived from the IK.
Considering the aforementioned, it can be concluded that
the key to improve the accuracy of forecasting a drought
event is the understanding of ’space-time’ interactions of
variables with processes, ontology representation of the do-
main and semantic integration of the heterogeneous sensor
data with indigenous knowledge for eﬃcient drought fore-
casting.
In order to provide services from heterogeneous
data sources, it is necessary to build systems that attach
meaning (semantics) to the sensors data.
Therefore, an
ontology-based semantic middleware is required to semanti-
cally represents the heterogeneous sensors data in machine-
readable language and a reasoning engine that will infer pat-
terns leading to drought event based on IK for an eﬃcient
drought early warning system (DEWS).
2.
MOTIVATION AND PROBLEM STATE-
MENTS
This research was motivated by the following factors:
Lack of ontology-based semantic middleware for the repre-
sentation of environmental process.
According to [17], ontology is the formal description of a
domain of discourse, intended for sharing among diﬀerent
applications, and expressed in a language that can be used
for reasoning. Ontological modelling of key concepts of en-
vironmental phenomena such as object, state, process and
event, ensures the drawing of accurate inference from the
sequence of processes that lead to an event. This can easily
be achieved by using an upper-level ontology that command
wide-spread acceptance from the semantic community and
extending it to meet the current environmental domain re-
quirements. This ensures the development of high quality
environmental ontology with well-deﬁned vocabularies that
allow explicit representation of the process, events and also
attach semantics to the participants in the environmental
domain. However, the lack of eﬀective descriptive environ-
mental ontology still persists, which gives rise to the prob-
lem of incompatibility, non-interoperability, lack of service
integration, and diﬃculty in generating environmental in-
ference from sensory readings since they are just raw data.
Hence, there is a need for semantic middleware that attaches
detailed semantic meaning to the raw data for ease of com-
munication and knowledge sharing. Existing work on this
can be found in [6], [21], [2].
Semantic integration of various heterogeneous data sources
with indigenous knowledge for an accurate environment fore-
casting.
Studies reveal that over 80% of farmers in some parts of
Kenya, Zambia, Zimbabwe and South Africa rely on In-
digenous knowledge forecasts (IKF) for their agricultural
practices [13]. IFKs provides an uncertain level of accuracy
that could result in loss of yield and manpower. An IoT-
based environmental monitoring system made up of inter-
connected heterogeneous weather information sources such
as sensors, mobile phones, conventional weather stations, in-
digenous knowledge could alleviate this [14]. Large number
of sensors/things could provides environmental data streams
required to be semantically represented for seamless data in-
tegration with existing indigenous knowledge. This integra-
tion will improve the accuracy of predicting drought.
IoT-based forecasts communication and dissemination.
There is a lack of eﬀective dissemination channels for drought
forecasting information, for example, the absence of smart
billboards placed at strategic locations, smart phones, IP ra-
dios and semantic web. The output channels would ensure
farmers have access to drought forecasting information and
the spatial distribution of drought vulnerability index would
be eﬀectively disseminated. However, the lack of this is a
formidable challenge for an eﬀective IoT-based environmen-
tal monitoring system.
3.
RESEARCH QUESTIONS
The research will be developed based on the following
questions:
To what extent does the adoption of knowledge representa-
tion and semantic technology in the development of a mid-
dleware enable seamless sharing and exchange of data among
heterogeneous IoT entities?
In recent years, the amount of computerized data and in-
formation available on the Web has spiraled out of control.
Many diﬀerent models and formats are being used that are
incompatible with each other. Traditionally, the easiest way
to address interoperability is to deﬁne standards [14]. Sev-
eral standards have been created to cope with the data het-
erogeneities.
Examples are the Sensor Markup Language
(SensorML)2 and Observations and Measurements Encoding
Standard3, WaterML4, and American Federal Geographic
Data (FGDC) Standard5.
However, these standards pro-
vides sensor data to a predeﬁned application in a standard-
ized format only, and hence do not generally solve data
heterogeneity.
The promising technology to tackle these
problems of heterogeneity and integration of ubiquitous data
sources is semantic technologies. Semantic technologies have
a stronger approach to interoperability than contemporary
standards-based approaches [18]. It creates knowledge rep-
resentation models that are general in order to allow mean-
ingful information exchange among machines through de-
tailed semantic referencing of metadata. It utilizes machine-
readable languages such as Resource Description Framework
(RDF) and Ontology Web Language (OWL) for seamless
data sharing and integration in an event-driven way. Sev-
eral upper-level ontologies are available for designating the
concepts of object, process and events [17]. Analyzing with
top-level ontology is however very necessary to identify the
basic objects and process that leads to an event.
What are the main components of an implementation frame-
work/architecture that employs the middleware to implement
an IoT-based Drought Early Warning Systems (DEWS)?
To answer this question, a case study based on environmen-
2http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/om
3http://www.opengeospatial.org/sensorml
4http://www.his.cuahsi.org/wofws.html
5https://www.fgdc.gov/metadata

tal monitoring and drought forecasting is identiﬁed. Here,
we examine the existing components and architecture used
in the case study as it conforms to IoT based systems: The
existence of ontology with well-deﬁned vocabularies that al-
lows an explicit representation of process, events, and their
participants to deal with environmental phenomena; the
availability of a reasoning engine that generates inference
based on input parameters; the representation and integra-
tion of the inputs in machine-readable formats. This is the
main focus of the research - the development of an ontology-
based semantic middleware for the representation of hetero-
geneous data sources and integration with IK for accurate
drought forecasting.
What method is best suitable to predict drought event by
combining heterogeneous sensor data with human indigenous
knowledge for an accurate drought forecasting system?
Currently, most drought predicting/forecasting system is
based on statistical model using data from weather stations
and WSNs data only. This research potential of integrating
semantically represented heterogeneous sensors data with IK
is exciting, and will improve the overall accuracy of drought
forecasting system.
4.
HIGH-LEVEL APPROACH TO MIDDLE-
WARE DESIGN
The development of the semantic middleware follows a
step-wise approach. The proposed middleware is a software
layer composed of a set of various sub-layers interposed be-
tween the application layer and the physical layer. The es-
sential role of the middleware is to hide the complexities and
eliminate the data heterogeneity from multiple data sources
[9], and representing the data semantically based on a uni-
ﬁed ontology.
It also provides Application Programming
Interface (API) for physical layer communication, abstrac-
tion of complex network communication and presenting the
data in a machine readable format for easy integration and
interoperability.
Based on these needs, an environmental process-based on-
tology is required to overcome the problems associated with
the dynamic nature of environmental data and the data het-
erogeneities. The study proposes to use a upper-level foun-
dational ontology DOLCE (Descriptive Ontology for Lin-
guistic and Cognitive Engineering) [15], for the modelling of
the foundational entities needed to represent the dynamic
phenomena. Figure 2 depicts the ontology library. The en-
tities will be identiﬁed and classiﬁed based on DOLCE clas-
siﬁcation of endurants, perdurants and quality [7]. Semanti-
cally represented information from the sensor data streams
will be integrated with IK using Complex Events Process-
ing (CEP) Engine 6. This will serve as the reasoning engine
for inferring patterns leading to drought event, based on a
set of rules derived from IK of the local people on drought.
The measured properties are modelled by DOLCE to attach
semantic meaning to the observed properties. The proper-
ties in data streams are fed into the CEP engine to infer
patterns. The semantic reasoning capability of the CEP en-
gine determines the patterns leading to the drought event.
The information in form of drought vulnerability index is dis-
seminated to the targeted end-user via various output IoT
6https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Complex event processing
channels such as the smart screen, semantic web and mobile
apps. Finally, the overall system will be implemented and
tested across a IoT-based environmental monitoring sensor
network test bed. The domain of this particular case study
is Free State Province, South Africa - an ongoing research
project by AfriCRID 7(The Africa Research Unit for Re-
search on Informatics for Drought), Department of Infor-
mation Technology, Central University of Technology, Free
State, South Africa.
Figure 1: The Ontology Library.
4.1
Middleware Development
According to [8], an ontology is a desirable solution for
achieving semantic interoperability since it captures con-
cepts of a domain and provides a foundation for discover-
ing and resolving semantic conﬂicts in the sensor data. It
consist of formal axioms that describe concepts, individuals
and the relationships between them. The development of
a middleware framework will be based on ontology. By us-
ing ontologies to enrich the descriptions of the domain, the
semantics of data content or service functionality become
machine-interpretable, and users are enabled to pose concise
and expressive queries. This implies that the ontology devel-
oped will identiﬁes entities and physical properties, followed
by the relations between them for the semantic referencing
of the metadata. Since, ontology is merely a passive object,
an inference engine is also required to enable querying and
reasoning with the semantic descriptions of sensor devices
and services. A CEP engine, which basically infer patterns
based on a set of syntactic derivation rules from indigenous
knowledge is used. An integrated development environment
(IDE), e.g. Eclipse, JBuilder, allows the querying of the on-
tology infrastructure residing in the middleware layer. The
resulted information is passed on to the output channels.
Figure 2 depicts the middleware integration framework.
Figure 2:
The semantic middleware integration
framework.
7http://www.africrid.com/

4.2
Middleware Architecture
The middleware layer is a three-tier architecture consist-
ing of application abstraction layer, ontology segment layer,
and the interface protocol layer as shown in ﬁgure 3.
4.2.1
Application Abstraction Layer
This layer provides a high level of software abstraction
that allows communication among the applications and the
semantic middleware.
4.2.2
Ontology Segment Layer
The middleware layer semantically reference the heteroge-
neous data streams based on the uniﬁed ontology. This layer
contains the ontology module, reasoning module, inference
engine, and semantic services description module.
4.2.3
Interface Protocol Layer
The Interface protocols liaise with the storage database in
the cloud for downloading the semi-processed sensory read-
ing.
Figure 3: Architecture of the middlware layer.
5.
OUTLOOK ON IMPLEMENTATION
The ﬁrst step involves data gathering from the sensors.
This involves setting up WSNs for the area under currently
under study. The research is using Libelium Sensor nodes es-
pecially the Waspmote Mote Runner8. The motes are based
on 6LoWPAN protocol which enables transmission of com-
pressed IPv6 packets over IEEE 802.15.4 networks.
The
environmental readings are uploaded via SMS gateway for
storage in the cloud.
This will be followed by gathering
the indigenous knowledge of the local people about drought,
through the use of questionnaire, workshop and interactive
sessions. The middleware layer acts as a bond joining het-
erogeneous domains of application community over hetero-
geneous interfaces. It incorporates interface protocols, which
8http://www.libelium.com/
liaise with the storage database in the cloud for download-
ing the semi-processed sensory reading to be semantically
represented based on the ontology through a mediator de-
vice [4]. The semantically represented heterogeneous sensor
data is integrated with the IK using the CEP engine. The
CEP engine infer patterns leading to drought event based
on the set of rules derived from the IK of the local peo-
ple on drought. This would be used to establish accurate
drought development patterns as early as possible and pro-
vide suﬃcient information to decision-makers to prepare for
the droughts long before they happen. This way, the pre-
diction can be used to mitigate eﬀects of droughts.
6.
EXPECTED OUTCOMES
The study is expected to produce an ontology-based se-
mantic middleware that will facilitate the semantic repre-
sentation and integration of heterogeneous sensor data with
indigenous knowledge. It will enhance eﬀective integration
in a heterogeneous environment, and most especially for the
seamless data sharing and communication for an IoT-based
DEWS. The middleware will be used to attach semantic
meaning to observed property and the detection-oriented
CEP Engine will infer patterns from the observed proper-
ties based on set of a indicators derived from the indigenous
knowledge. This will increase the accuracy of drought fore-
casting information that is disseminated via output chan-
nels.
Also, the representation of the heterogeneous data
sources by the proposed ontology and integration with in-
digenous knowledge will be demonstrated.
7.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The PhD research is funded by the Research Grant Scheme
of Central University of Technology, Free State, South Africa.
We also wish to thank anonymous reviewers for their valu-
able comments on earlier versions of this paper.
8.
