Deceptive AI Explanations - Creation and Detection
Johannes Schneider1, Christian Meske2 and Michalis Vlachos3
1 University of Liechtenstein, Vaduz, Liechtenstein
2 University of Bochum, Bochum, Germany
3 University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland

Keywords:
Explainability, Artiﬁcial intelligence, Deception, Detection
Abstract:
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) comes with great opportunities but can also pose signiﬁcant risks. Automatically
generated explanations for decisions can increase transparency and foster trust, especially for systems based
on automated predictions by AI models. However, given, e.g., economic incentives to create dishonest AI,
to what extent can we trust explanations? To address this issue, our work investigates how AI models (i.e.,
deep learning, and existing instruments to increase transparency regarding AI decisions) can be used to create
and detect deceptive explanations. As an empirical evaluation, we focus on text classiﬁcation and alter the
explanations generated by GradCAM, a well-established explanation technique in neural networks. Then, we
evaluate the effect of deceptive explanations on users in an experiment with 200 participants. Our ﬁndings
conﬁrm that deceptive explanations can indeed fool humans. However, one can deploy machine learning
(ML) methods to detect seemingly minor deception attempts with accuracy exceeding 80% given sufﬁcient
domain knowledge. Without domain knowledge, one can still infer inconsistencies in the explanations in an
unsupervised manner, given basic knowledge of the predictive model under scrutiny.
1
INTRODUCTION
AI can be used to increase wealth and well-being
globally.
However, the potential uses of AI cause
concerns. For example, because of the limited mod-
eration of online content, attempts at deception pro-
liferate.
Online media struggle against the plague
of “fake news”, and e-commerce sites spend consid-
erable effort in detecting deceptive product reviews
(see [Wu et al., 2020] for a survey). Marketing strate-
gies exist that consider the creation of fake reviews to
make products appear better or to provide false claims
about product quality [Adelani et al., 2019].
There are multiple reasons why to provide “al-
tered” explanations of a predictive system.
Truth-
ful explanations might allow to re-engineer the logic
of the AI system, i.e., leak intellectual property.
Decision-makers might also deviate from suggested
AI decisions at will. For example, a bank employee
might deny a loan to a person she dislikes claim-
ing an AI model’s recommendation as to the rea-
son, supported by a made-up explanation (irrespec-
tive of the actual recommendation of the system). AI
systems may perform better when using information
that should not be used but is available. For exam-
ple, private information on a person’s health condi-
tion might be used by insurances to admit or deny
applicants.
Even though this is forbidden in some
countries, the information is still very valuable in es-
timating expected costs of the applicant if admitted.
Product suggestions delivered through recommender
systems are also commonly accompanied by expla-
nations [Fusco et al., 2019] in the hope of increasing
the likelihood of sales. Companies have an incentive
to provide explanations that lure customers into sales
irrespective of their truthfulness. As such, there are
incentives to build systems that utilize such informa-
tion but hide its use. That is, “illegal” decision criteria
are used, but they are omitted from explanations re-
quested by authorities or even citizens. In Europe, the
GDPR law grants rights to individuals to get explana-
tions of decisions made in an automated manner.
The paper contributes in the area of empirical and
formal analyses of deceptive AI explanations. Our
empirical analysis, including a user study, shows in
alignment with prior work that deceptive AI explana-
tions can mislead people. Our formal analysis sets
forth some generic conditions under which detection
of deceptive explanations is possible. We show that
domain knowledge is required to detect certain forms
arXiv:2001.07641v3  [cs.LG]  2 Dec 2021

of deception that might not be available to explainees
(the recipients of explanations). Our supervised and
unsupervised detection marks one of the ﬁrst steps in
the quest against deceptive explanations. They high-
light that while detecting deception is often possible,
success depends on multiple factors such as type of
deception, availability of domain knowledge and ba-
sic knowledge of the deceptive system.
2
PROBLEM DEFINITION
We consider classiﬁcation systems that are trained us-
ing a labeled dataset D = {(X, Y )} with two sources
of deception: model decisions and explanations. A
model M maps input X ∈S to an output Y , where
S is the set of all possible inputs. To measure the
level of deception, we introduce a reference (machine
learning (ML)) model M ∗and a reference explana-
tion method H∗. In practice, M ∗might be a deep
learning model and H∗a commonly used explain-
ability method such as LIME or SHAP. That is, H∗
might not be perfect. Still, we assume that the ex-
plainee trusts it, i.e.
she understands its behavior
and in what ways explanations differ from ”human”
reasoning. The model M ∗is optimized with a be-
nign objective, i.e.
maximizing accuracy.
We as-
sume that M ∗is not optimized to be deceptive. How-
ever, model M ∗might not be fair and behave uneth-
ically. A deceiver might pursue other objectives than
those used for M ∗leading to the deceiver’s model
M D. The model M D might simply alter a few de-
cisions of M ∗using simple rules or it might be a
completely different model. A (truthful) explainabil-
ity method H(X, Y, M) receives input X, class la-
bel Y and model M to output an explanation. For
the reference explanation method H∗, this conforms
to provide a best-effort, ideally a truthful, reasoning,
why model M would output class Y . The deceiver’s
method HD might deviate from H∗using arbitrary
information. It returns HD(X), where the exact de-
ception procedure is deﬁned in context. An explainee
(the recipient of an explanation) obtains for an input
X, a decision M D(X) and an explanation HD(X).
The decision is allegedly from M ∗and the explana-
tion allegedly from H∗and truthful to the model M D
providing the decision.
Thus, an explainee should
be lured into believing that M ∗(X) = M D(X) and
HD(X) = H∗(X, M D(X), M D). However, the de-
ceiver’s model might not output M D(X) = M ∗(X)
and a deceiver might choose an explainability method
HD that differs from H∗or she might explain a differ-
ent class Y . This leads to four scenarios (see Figure
1). We write H∗(X) := H∗(X, M D(X), M D).
The goal of a deceiver is to construct an explana-
tion so that the explainee is neither suspicious about
the decision in case it is not truthful to the model M D,
ie. M D(X) ̸= M ∗(X), nor about the explanation
HD(X) if it deviates from H∗(X, M D(X), M ∗).
Thus, an explanation might be used to hide an un-
faithful decision to the model or it might be used to
convey a different decision-making process than oc-
curs in M D.
An input X consists of values for n features,
F = {i|i = 1 . . . n}, where each feature i has a sin-
gle value xi ∈Vi of a set of feasible values Vi. For
example, an input X can be a text document such as a
job application, where each feature i is a word speci-
ﬁed by a word id xi. Documents X ∈S are extended
or cut to a ﬁxed length n. ML models learn (a hier-
archy of) features. Explaining in terms of learnt fea-
tures is challenging since they are not easily mapped
to unique concepts that are humanly understandable.
Thus, we focus on explanations that assign relevance
scores to features F of an input X. Formally, we con-
sider explanations H that output a value Hi(X, Y, M)
for each feature i ∈F. Where Hi > 0 implies that
feature i with value xi is supportive of decision Y . A
value of zero implies no dependence of i on the deci-
sion Y . Hi < 0 shows that feature i is indicative of
another decision.
3
MEASURING EXPLANATION
FAITHFULNESS
We measure faithfulness of an explanation using two
metrics, namely decision ﬁdelity and explanation ﬁ-
delity.
Decision ﬁdelity.
It amounts to the standard no-
tion of quantifying whether input X and explanation
HD(X) on their own allow deriving the correct de-
cision Y = M ∗(X) [Schneider and Handali, 2019].
Therefore, if explanations indicate multiple outputs
or an output different from Y , this is hardly possible.
Decision ﬁdelity fD can be deﬁned as the loss when
predicting the outcome using some classiﬁer g based
on the explanation only, or formally:
fD(X) = −L(g(X, HD(X)), Y )
(1)
The loss might be deﬁned as 0 if g(X, HD(X)) = Y
and 1 otherwise. We assume that the reference ex-
planations H∗(X, M ∗(X), M ∗) results in minimum
loss, i.e., maximum decision ﬁdelity. (Large) deci-
sion ﬁdelity does not require that an explanation con-
tains all relevant features used to derive the decision
M D(X). For example, in a hiring process, gender

Figure 1: Scenarios for reported predictions and explanations
might inﬂuence the decision, but for a particular can-
didate other factors, such as qualiﬁcation, social skills
etc., are dominant and on their own unquestionably
lead to a hiring decision.
Explanation ﬁdelity.
This refers to the overlap of
the (potentially deceptive) explanation HD(X) and
the reference explanation H∗(X, M D(X), M D) for
an input X and reported decision M D(X). Any mis-
match of a feature in the two explanations lowers ex-
planation ﬁdelity. It is deﬁned as:
fO(X) = 1 −∥H∗(X, M D(X), M D) −HD(X)∥
∥H∗(X, M D(X), M D)∥
(2)
Even if the decision M D(X) is non-truthful to the
model, i.e., M D(X) ̸= M ∗(X), explanation ﬁdelity
might be large if the explanation correctly outputs the
reasoning that would lead to the reported decision.
If the reported decision is truthful, i.e., M D(X) =
M ∗(X), there seems to be an obvious correlation be-
tween decision- and explanation ﬁdelity. But any ar-
bitrarily small deviation of explanation ﬁdelity from
the maximum of 1 does not necessarily ensure large
decision ﬁdelity and vice versa. For example, assume
that an explanation from HD systematically under- or
overstates the relevance of features, i.e. HD(X)i =
H∗(X)i · ci with arbitrary ci > 0 and ci ̸= 1. For ci
differing signiﬁcantly from 1, this leads to explana-
tions that are far from the truth, which is captured by
low explanation ﬁdelity. However, decision ﬁdelity
might yield the opposite picture, i.e., maximum de-
cision ﬁdelity, since a classiﬁer g (Def. 1) trained on
inputs (X, HD(X)) with labels M D(X), might learn
the coefﬁcients ci and predict labels without errors.
Explanation ﬁdelity captures the degree of decep-
tiveness of explanations from HD by aggregating the
differences of its relevances of features and those of
the reference explanations. When looking at individ-
ual features from a layperson’s perspective, deception
can arise due to over- and understating the feature’s
relevance or even fabricating features (see Figure 2).
Omission and inverting of features can be viewed as
Figure 2: Deviations from (trusted) reference explanation
special cases of over- and understating. In this work,
we do not consider feature fabrication.
4
CREATION OF DECEPTIVE
EXPLANATIONS
We ﬁrst discuss goals a deceiver might pursue us-
ing deceptive explanations, followed by how decep-
tive explanations can be created using these goals in
mind.
Purposes of Deceptive Explanation
include:
i) Convincing the explainee of an incorrect prediction,
i.e. that a model decided Y for input X although the
model’s output is M D(X) with Y ̸= M D(X). For
example, a model M ∗in health-care might predict
the best treatment for a patient trained on historical
data D. A doctor might change the prediction. She
might provide the best treatment for well-paying (pri-
vately insured) patients and choose a treatment that
minimizes her effort and costs for other patients.
ii) Providing an explanation that does not accurately
capture model behavior without creating suspicion.
An incorrect explanation will manifest in low deci-
sion ﬁdelity and explanation ﬁdelity. It involves hid-
ing or overstating the importance of features in the
decision process (Figure 2) with more holistic goals
such as:
a) Omission: Hiding that decisions are made based on
speciﬁc attributes such as gender or race to prevent le-

gal consequences or a loss in reputation.
b) Obfuscation: Hiding the decision mechanism of
the algorithm to protect intellectual property.
The combination of (i) and (ii) leads to the four sce-
narios shown in Figure 1.
Creation:
To construct deceptive explanations (and
decisions), a deceiver has access to the model M ∗
and M D, the input X and the reference explanation
H∗. She outputs a decision M D(X) in combination
with an explanation HD(X) (see Figure 3). Decep-
tive explanations are constructed to maximize the ex-
plainee’s credence of decisions and explanations. We
assume that an explainee is most conﬁdent that the
reference explanation H∗(X, Y, M D) and the model-
based decision Y = M ∗(X) are correct. This en-
codes the assumption that the truth is most intuitive
since any deception must contain some reason that
can be identiﬁed as faulty.
We provide simple means for creating deceptive
explanations
that
are
non-truthful
explanations
(FT and FF). The idea is to alter reference ex-
planations.
This approach is signiﬁcantly simpler
than creating deceptive explanations from scratch
using complex algorithms as done in other works
[Aivodji et al., 2019,
Lakkaraju and Bastani, 2019,
Adelani et al., 2019], while at the same time guaran-
teeing high-quality deceptive explanations since they
are based on what the explainee expects as a valid
explanation. For non-truthful explanations a deceiver
aims at over-, understating or omitting features
X′ ⊆X that are problem or instance-speciﬁc. To
obtain non-truthful explanations we alter reference
explanations in two ways:
Deﬁnition 1 (Omission). Remove a ﬁxed set of values
V so that no feature i has a value xi ∈V as follows:
HOmit(X)i :=
(
0,
if xi ∈V.
H∗(X)i,
otherwise.
(3)
In our context, this means denying the relevance
of some words V related to concepts such as gender
or race. The next alteration distorts relevance scores
of all features, eg. to prevent re-engineering through
obfuscation.
Deﬁnition 2 (Noise addition). Add noise in a multi-
plicative manner for any explanation H∗(X):
HNoise(X)i := H∗(X)i · (1 + ri,X),
(4)
where ri,X is chosen uniformly at random in [−k, k]
for a parameter k for each feature i and input X ∈S.
We assume that these alterations are applied con-
sistently for all outputs. Note, that this does not imply
that all explanations are indeed non-truthful, e.g., for
noise it might be that by chance explanations are not
altered or only very little, for omission it might be that
a feature is not relevant in the decision for a particular
input X, i.e. the value of a feature H∗(X)i is zero
anyway.
5
DECEPTION DETECTION
To detect deception attempts, we reason using expla-
nations and decisions of multiple inputs. That is, for a
set of inputs X ∈SD, we are given for each input X
the reported decision M D(X) and accompanying ex-
planation HD(X). Our goal is to identify if a model
outputs deceptive explanations or not. For supervised
learning, we (even) aim to identify the inputs yielding
deceptive outputs. We assume that only features that
are claimed to contribute positively to a decision are
included in explanations. Features that are claimed
to be irrelevant or even supporting of another deci-
sion outcome are ignored. The motivation is that we
aim at explanations that are as simple to understand as
possible. The omission of negatively contribution fea-
tures makes detection harder. We ﬁrst provide theo-
retical insights before looking into practical detection
approaches.
Formal investigation:
Ideally, any of the three
types of deception {TF, FT, FF} is detected using
only one or more inputs X ∈SD and their responses
M D(X) and HD(X) (see Figure 3). But, without
additional domain knowledge (such as correctly la-
beled samples), metadata or context information, this
is not impossible for all deception attempts. This fol-
lows since data, such as class labels, bear no mean-
ing on their own. Thus, any form of ”consistent” ly-
ing is successful, eg. always claiming that a cat is a
dog (using explanations for class dog) and a dog is a
cat (using explanations for class cat) is non-detectable
for anybody lacking knowledge on cats and dogs, i.e.,
knowing what a cat or a dog is.
Theorem 1. There exist non-truthful reported deci-
sions M D(X) ̸= M ∗(X) that cannot be identiﬁed as
non-truthful.
Proof. Consider a model M D for dataset {(X, Y )}
for binary classiﬁcation with labels Y ∈{0, 1} and
M D(X) = M ∗(X). Assume a deceiver switches the
decision of model M D, i.e. it returns M D(X) =
1 −M ∗(X) and H∗(X, M D(X), M D).
Consider
a dataset with switched labels, i.e.
{(X, 1 −Y )}
and a second model M ′D that is identical to M D
except that it outputs M ′D(X)
=
1 −Y
=
1 −M D(X).
Thus, reference explanations are

Figure 3: Inputs and outputs for deceiver and explainee for scenario FT in Figure 1. Images by [Petsiuk et al., 2018].
identical, i.e.
we have H∗(X, M ′D(X), M ′D) =
H∗(X, M D(X), M D).
Thus, for input X both
the deceiver and model M ′D report M D(X)
=
1 −M D(X) and H∗(X, M D(X), M D). Therefore,
M ′D and M D cannot be distinguished by any detec-
tor.
A similar theorem might be stated for non-truthful
explanations H ̸= H∗, eg. by using feature inversion
H(X) = −H∗(X).
The following theorem states that one cannot hide
that a feature (value) is inﬂuential if the exchange of
the value with another value leads to a change in de-
cision.
Theorem 2. Omission of at least one feature value
v ∈V can be detected, if there are instances X, X′ ∈
S with decisions M D(X) ̸= M D(X′) and X′ = X
except for one feature j with xj, x′
j ∈V and x′
j ̸= xj.
Proof. We provide a constructive argument. We can
obtain for each input X ∈S, the prediction M D(X)
and explanation HD(X).
By Deﬁnition of Omis-
sion, if feature values V are omitted it must hold
HD(X)i = 0 for all (i, X) ∈FS,v and v ∈V. Omis-
sion occurred if this is violated or there are X, X′ ∈S
that differ only in the value xj ∈V for feature j and
M D(X) ̸= M D(X′). The latter holds because the
change in decision must be attributed to the fact that
of xj ̸= x′
j, since X and X′ are identical except for
feature j with values that are deemed omitted.
Theorem 2 is constructive, meaning that it can eas-
ily be translated into an algorithm by checking all in-
puts S if the stated condition is matched. But, gen-
erally all inputs S cannot be evaluated due to com-
putational costs. Furthermore, the existence of inputs
X, X′ ∈S that only differ in a speciﬁc feature is not
guaranteed. However, from a practical perspective, it
becomes apparent that data collection helps in detec-
tion, i.e. one is more likely to identify ”contradictory”
samples X, X′ in a subset S′ ⊂S the larger S′ is.
Detection
Approaches
Our
formal
analysis
showed that only decisions and explanations are
not sufﬁcient to detect deception involving ﬂipped
classes.
That is, some knowledge on the domain
is needed.
Encoding domain know-how with a
labeled dataset seems preferable to using expert rules
or the-like.
Thus, not surprisingly, this approach
is common in the literature, e.g.
for fake news
detection [P´erez-Rosas et al., 2017, Przybyla, 2020].
To train a detector, each sample is a triple (X,
M D(X), HD(X)) for X ∈ST together with label
L
∈
{TT, FT, TF, FF} stating the scenario in
Figure 1.
After the training, the classiﬁer can be
applied to the explanations and decisions of X ∈SD
to investigate.
We develop classiﬁers maximizing
deception detection accuracy.
Labeling data might be difﬁcult since it requires
not only domain knowledge on the application but
also knowledge on ML, ie. the reference model and
explainability method. Thus, we also propose unsu-
pervised approaches to identify whether a model, ie.
its explanations, are truthful to the model decision.
That is, the goal is to assess if given explanations HD
are true to the model M D(X) or not.
Our approach is to check, whether the explana-
tions of HD and decisions of M D are consistent. This
would be easy, if the model M D was available, ie. we
would check if H∗(X, M D(X), M D) = HD(X).
Since it is not, we aim to use a model M ′ to approx-
imate model M D and compare the explanations H∗
of M ′ with HD. Since approximation introduces an
error, we must determine if differences in the expla-
nations originate from model approximation or from
deception. To do so, we train (approximate) reference
models M ′ ≈M D with M ′ ∈M′ using the provided
data (X, M D(X)) with X ∈SD. The models might
differ, e.g. in hyperparameter settings. If explana-
tions of M D are ”outliers” relative to those of models
M ′ ∈M′ explanations might be untruthful and fur-
ther investigation is needed. Otherwise, any variation
of explanation compared to H∗due to deception is
comparable to variation that might arise if models are
slightly varied but no deception is attempted.

Algorithm 1 ConsistencyChecker
Input: Untrained models M′, reference method
H∗, inputs SD with (deceptive) decisions and ex-
planations {(M D(X), HD(X)}
Output: (Outlier) Probability p
SM ′ = s randomly chosen elements from SD with
s random in [c0|SD|, |SD|] {We used: c0 = 0.33}
Train each model M ′ ∈M′ on (X, M D(X)) for X ∈
SM′
m∗
i (X) =
1
|M′|
P
M′∈M′ H∗
i (X, M D(X), M ′)
s(M ′) =
P
i∈[0,n−1],X∈SD (H∗
i (X, MD(X), M′) −mi(X))2
n|SD|
s(M D) =
P
i∈[0,n−1],X∈SD(HD
i (X) −mi(X))2
n|SD|
µ =
1
|M′|
P
M′∈M′ s(M ′)
σ =
1
|M′|
qP
M′∈M′(s(M ′) −µ)2
p = prob
 T > |s(M D) −µ|
 T ∼N(0, σ)

Details on the model M D are unknown. But for many
common ML tasks excellent performing architectures
are publicly known. Therefore, we assume that we
can anticipate at least a well-working architecture for
the problem – the closer it is to M D the better.
Algorithm 1 (ConsistencyChecker) shows details. It
takes as input a set of untrained models M ′ ∈M′
– ideally similar to M D. The more information is
known on M D, the more similar the models can be
chosen. If only very little information or no informa-
tion on M D is available, one might train models on
(X, M D(X)) for X ∈SD and choose those that per-
form best.
The second unsupervised approach Algorithm 2
(UsefulnessChecker) tries to reproduce the decisions
based on explanations. If this is not possible for ex-
planations from M D but for those of approximate
models M D then explanations from M D are likely
deceptive. As before, we train multiple approximate
models M ′ ∈M′. For each of these models M ′, we
train a classiﬁer CM ′ using explanations from the ap-
proximate models M′ as well as one on explanations
from M D. We use the same classiﬁer architecture for
all. We conduct a statistical test (as in Algorithm 1),
if accuracy is an outlier. The full pseudo-code is sim-
ilar to Algorithm 1. For the sake of completeness, it
is shown in Algorithm 2.
6
EVALUATION
We elaborate on two text classiﬁcation tasks using a
convolutional neural network (CNN) for text classi-
ﬁcation by [Kim, 2014] as our reference model M ∗
Algorithm 2 UsefulnessChecker
Input: Untrained models M′, reference method
H∗, inputs SD with (deceptive) decisions and expl.
{(M D(X), HD(X)}, untrained classiﬁer model C
Output: (Outlier) Probability p
SM ′ = s randomly chosen elements from SD with
s random in [c0|SD|, |SD|] {We used: c0 := 0.33}
Train each model M ′ ∈M′ on (X, M D(X) for
X ∈SM ′
ST = random subset of SD of size c1|SD| {We
used: c1 := 0.8}
CM ′
=
trained
classiﬁer
model
C
on
 H∗(X, M D(X), M ′), M D(X)

for X ∈ST and
M ′ ∈M′
CM D
=
trained
classiﬁer
model
C
on
 HD(X, M D(X), M D), M D(X)

for X ∈ST
Acc(CM) := Accuracy of classiﬁer CM using
X ∈SD \ ST
µ =
1
|M′|
P
M ′∈M′ Acc(CM ′)
σ =
1
|M′|
qP
M ′∈M′(Acc(CM ′) −µ)2
p = prob
 T > |Acc(CM D) −µ|
 T ∼N(0, σ)

and GradCAM [Selvaraju et al., 2017] for generat-
ing reference explanations H∗.
The CNN is well-
established, conceptually simple and works reason-
ably well. GradCAM was one of the methods said
to have passed elementary sanity checks that many
other methods did not [Adebayo et al., 2018]. While
GradCAM is most commonly employed for CNN on
image recognition the mechanisms for texts are iden-
tical.
In fact, [Lertvittayakumjorn and Toni, 2019]
showed that GradCAM on CNNs similar to the one by
[Kim, 2014] leads to outcomes on human tasks that
are comparable to other explanation methods such as
LIME. The GradCAM method, which serves as refer-
ence explanation H∗, computes a gradient-weighted
activation map starting from a given layer or neuron
within that layer back to the input X. We apply the
reference explanation method H∗, ie. GradCAM, on
the neuron before the softmax layer that represents
the class Y ′ to explain.
For generating a high ﬁ-
delity explanation for an incorrectly reported predic-
tion M D(X) ̸= M ∗(X) (scenario FT in Figure 1)
we provide as explanation the reference explanation,
i.e. HD(X) = H∗(X, M D(X), M D). By deﬁnition
reference explanations maximize explanation ﬁdelity
fO.
Setup:
We employed two datasets.
The IMDB
dataset [Maas et al., 2011] consists of movie reviews

Figure 4: Generated sample explanations for scenarios TT
(top) and FT (bottom) from Figure 1
and a label indicating positive or negative sentiment
polarity. We also utilized the Web of Science (WoS)
dataset consisting of abstracts of scientiﬁc papers
classiﬁed into 7 categories [Kowsari et al., 2017].
Our CNNs for classiﬁcation achieved accuracies of
87% for IMDB and 75% for WoS trained with 2/3
of the samples for training and 1/3 for testing. We
computed explanations for test data only. For decep-
tion using omission, we removed a randomly chosen
set of words V (see Def. 1), such that their overall
contribution to all explanations H∗is k% (with a
tolerance of 0.01k %). The contribution of a word
v is given by P
(i,X)∈F(v,S) H∗(X, M ∗(X))i. For
explanation distortion parameter k (see Deﬁnitions 1
and 2) we state values for each experiment.
ML based Detection:
As detector models, we used
CNN models. For supervised learning, the model in-
put is a concatenation of three vectors: i) a text vector
of word indices, ii) a heatmap vector of values ob-
tained via GradCAM, that is a 1:1 mapping of the vi-
sual output shown to the user, and iii) a one-hot pre-
diction vector of the decision. Our ”simple” CNN de-
tector, i.e. classiﬁer, is designed as follows: we per-
form an embedding, concatenate the heatmap vector
with the word embedding before doing a 1D convo-
lution. Then we concatenate the one-hot prediction
vector and use two dense layers. The more ”com-
plex” CNN adds six more conv1D layers: two pro-
cessing the embedding, two on the heatmap vector,
and two after the ﬁrst concatenation. We used dropout
for regularization. Since labeling is difﬁcult and po-
tentially error-prone, we consider different levels of
label noise, i.e., L ∈[0, 0.32], such that a fraction L
of all labels were replaced with a random label (dif-
ferent from the correct one). For the detection ex-
periment, we chose samples that were predicted cor-
rectly by the truthful model. For unsupervised learn-
ing, we train 35 classiﬁers M ′ ∈M′ being varia-
tions of a CNN network [Kim, 2014], i.e., each of the
following hyperparameters was chosen uniformly at
random for each classiﬁer M ′: embedding dimension
{32, 64, 128}; 1-3 linear layers; 2-6 conv layers for
the Kim network with varying number of ﬁlters. We
also varied the training sets in terms of size and ele-
ments, ie. we trained a model with a subset of T of
size 33, 50 and 100%. Any model was trained using
the Adam optimizer for 100 epochs. Train/Test data
split was 80/20 for all detector models.
Classiﬁers learning from (deceptive) explanations
as done in our unsupervised approach Usefulness-
Checker tend sometimes to focus on raw inputs X
and disregard explanation relevance scores HD
i (X).
That is, they often work well and show little varia-
tion in accuracy despite large variations in explana-
tions. To avoid this, we convolve also an inner repre-
sentation of the network with explanation values en-
forcing stronger entanglement. That is, in the Use-
fulnessChecker model the output of the word embed-
ding of the input is convolved with the explanations
as follows: First, we perform a low-dimensional em-
bedding (just one dimensional) and multiply the em-
bedding values with the explanation values and add
explanation values on top.
This is then fed into 3
Conv1D layers followed by two dense layers.
Human-based Detection:
We conducted a user
study using the IMDB dataset.1 For the scenarios of
interest, we compare explanations that are aligned to
the shown prediction, i.e. TT and FT. Two samples
are shown in Figure 4. We recruited a total of 200 par-
ticipants on Amazon Mechanical Turk from the US
having at least a high-school degree. We presented
each participant with 25 predictions together with ex-
planations. They had to answer ”Is the classiﬁcation
correct?” on a scale of ﬁve ranging from strongly dis-
agree to strongly agree. We randomized the choice of
presented samples, i.e. we randomly chose a sample
of the dataset and we randomly chose between sce-
narios TT and FT in Figure 1.
7
RESULTS
Human-based Detection:
Out of the 200 partici-
pants, we removed participants that spend less than 5
seconds per question, since we deemed this time too
short to provide a reasonable answer. We also ﬁltered
out participants who always gave the same answer for
all 25 questions. This left 140 participants amounting
to 3,500 answers. Demographics and answer distribu-
tions are in Figure 5 and Table 1.
1The WoS dataset seems less suited since it uses
expert terminology that is often not held by the gen-
eral public from which participants originate as found
in [Lertvittayakumjorn and Toni, 2019].

Variable
Value
Percentage
Gender
Male
66%
Female
34%
Age
≤25 years of age
18%
from 26 to 40 years of age
62%
from 41 to 65 years of age
18%
> 65 years of age
2%
Education
High School
16%
Associate Degree
11%
Bachelor’s Degree
56%
Master’s Degree
16%
Doctoral Degree
1%
Table 1: Participants Demographics with n = 140 partici-
pants
Figure 5: Distributions of user replies to “The classiﬁcation
is correct” (1 = strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree).
A t-test of means conﬁrmed that the distributions
differ signiﬁcantly (p-value of 0.008), though the
mean scores for ”agreeing” of 3.74(TT) and 3.58(FT)
show that in absolute terms differences are minor.
This implies that while the majority of humans might
be fooled oftentimes, they have the capability to col-
lectively detect deceptive explanations.
Supervised ML-based Detection
Figure 6 shows
results for IMDB, those for WoS are similar, shown
in Figure 7. The plot shows that for very minor de-
ception (small k) detection is more difﬁcult. Accu-
racy rarely tops 60%, which is fairly low given that
50% is the baseline for guessing. Accuracy is also
more volatile given label noise. Beyond some thresh-
old under all scenarios, accuracy exceeds 90% for cor-
rectly deciding whether a decision and/or explanation
are deceptive. Accuracy worsens with greater label
noise, though it is often better than guessing even for
a noise level of 32%. Mostly the complex CNN (with
more layers) outperforms the simple one with one ex-
ception: the scenario where the explanation is always
truthful to the model, but the decision is not. Here, a
simple function allows distinguishing deceptive (FT)
from the non-deceptive scenario (TT). We observed
that for the scenario with noise on non-truthful expla-
nations for correct decisions (TFNoise) small noise
levels can lead to very low test accuracies. Training
accuracies were larger, but mostly close to random
guessing, indicating that the network fails to learn
proper conditions what values constitute a noisy rele-
vance score and which do not.
Unsupervised ML-based Detection
For a single
model, a small probability indicates that it is unlikely
to witness such an (extreme) outcome, i.e. accuracy
or deviation from the average explanation. Thus, a
small probability such as 0.05 indicates a high like-
lihood of deception. Figure 10 shows the average as
well as maximum probability of all 35 models. Detec-
tion ability follows an S-curve, meaning that for de-
ception with parameterized strength k above a thresh-
old detection works fairly well, whereas it fails oth-
erwise. Required noise levels are somewhat higher
for the WoS dataset, as shown in Figure 7 but qualita-
tively, results are identical. The trained classiﬁer per-
forms worse on WoS than IMDB, since WoS is a more
complex dataset. Classiﬁers vary (relatively) more in
accuracy, which in turn also leads to more variance in
explanations. Looking at the mean and max indicates
that for multiplicative noise (TFNoise) all deceptive
models are reliably detected for k = 0.8, while below
that value at least for the most difﬁcult to detect model
it fails to do so. For k < 0.8, the detection methods
are still valuable to identify suspicious models, mean-
ing that such models exhibit lower probability, but are
not low enough to be certain. The same reasoning
also applies to TFOmit, though here a strong differ-
ence between methods is apparent. The Consisten-
cyChecker yields much better outcomes, highlighting
that even small omissions can be detected reliably. It
shows that statistical analysis is preferable to using a
downstream task. Our models M′ are very diverse,
ie. models differ by a factor of 3 in terms of training
data and number of layers, as well as in neurons/ﬁlters
per layer. We found that reducing (or increasing) the
diversity has a profound impact on results, as shown
in Figures 8 and 9.
8
DIFFICULTY OF DECEPTION
DETECTION
We provide intuition for Algorithm Consistency-
Checker discussing the difﬁculty of detection de-
pending on noise models and deception strategy.
To compute the probability, we rely on values
s(M) as deﬁned in Algorithm 1.
We are in-
terested in the gap G(Hi, mi(X))
:=
E[(Hi −
mi(X))2] between the mean and the relevance score
in the explanation of a feature i. For multiplicative
noise we have HD
i (X, M D(X), M) = (1 + U) ·
H∗
i (X, M D(X), M D), where U is uniformly cho-
sen at random from [−k, k].
We shall use ai :=

Figure 6: Supervised detection results for IMDB for scenarios in Figure 1.
Figure 7: ML-based supervised detection results for WoS for scenarios in Figure 1.
Figure 8: Unsupervised detection results for WoS where ap-
proximate models vary only in training data (but have the
same hyperparameters)
Figure 9: Unsupervised detection results for WoS where ap-
proximate models vary in training data and hyperparame-
ters. Detection is more difﬁcult compared to varying train-
ing data only (Figure 8)
H∗
i (X, M D(X), M D) and mi := mi(X) for ease of
notation. We expect that the deviation for a deceptive
explanation and the mean is:
G((1 + U)ai, mi) =E[((1 + U)ai −mi)2]
= E[(ai −mi)2 −2Uaimi −U 2a2
i ]
= (ai −mi)2 + a2
i k2/3
The overall deviation s(M) for a model is just the
mean across all features i and inputs X. Detection is
difﬁcult when
X
i,X
(ai −mi)2 ≫
X
i,X
a2k2/3
(5)
Put in words, detection is difﬁcult, when the distor-
tion due to deception (right-hand side term in Equa-
tion 5) is small compared to the one due to model
variations M′ (left hand side term in Equation 5).
The closer ai and mi are and the larger k, the eas-
ier detection. For omission we get that if feature i
is omitted then G(ai, mi) = m2
i and G(ai, mi) =
(ai −mi)2. Assume a set F D of features is omitted,
where the size of F D depends on the parameter k.
We get that deception is difﬁcult if P
i(ai −mi)2 ≫
P
i∈F D m2
i + P
i/∈F D(ai −mi)2. Clearly, the larger
F D the easier detection. Say we omit features with
mi = ai and we are given the choice of omitting two
features with mean m or one with mean 2m. The
latter is easier to detect since means are squared, ie.
m2 + m2 = 2m2 < (2m)2 = 4m2. Therefore, it is
easier to detect few highly relevant omitted features
than many irrelevant ones.

Figure 10: Unsupervised detection results for IMDB.
9
RELATED WORK
[Slack et al., 2020] showed how arbitrary explana-
tions for methods relying on perturbations can be
generated for instances by training a classiﬁer with
adversarial inputs.
[Dimanov et al., 2020] trains
a classiﬁer using an explainability loss term for
a feature that should be masked in explanations.
[Fukuchi et al., 2020] showed that biases in decision-
making are difﬁcult to detect in an input-output
dataset of a biased model if the inputs were sampled
in a way to disguise the detector. [Lai and Tan, 2019]
used ML (including explanations) to support detec-
tion of deceptive content. The explanations were non-
deceptive.
[Viering et al., 2019] are interested in manipulat-
ing the inner workings of a deep learning network to
output arbitrary explanations. Whether the explana-
tions themselves are convincing or not, is not consid-
ered, i.e., the paper shows many examples of ”incred-
ible” explanations that can easily be detected as non-
genuine. [Aivodji et al., 2019] focus on manipulating
reported fairness based on a regularized rule list enu-
meration algorithm.
[Lakkaraju and Bastani, 2019]
investigated the effectiveness of misleading explana-
tions to manipulate users’ trust. Decisions were made
using prohibited features such as gender and race
but misleading explanations were supposed to dis-
guise their usage. Both studies [Aivodji et al., 2019,
Lakkaraju and Bastani, 2019] found that users can be
manipulated into trusting high ﬁdelity but misleading
explanations for correct predictions. In contrast, we
do not generate fake reviews but only generate mis-
leading justiﬁcations for review classiﬁcations and
provide detection methods and some formal analysis.
Inspiration for detecting deceptive explanations
might be drawn from methods used for evaluating the
quality of explanations [Mohseni et al., 2021]. In our
setup, quality is a relative notion compared to an ex-
isting explainability method and not to a (human) gold
standard. Papenmeier et al. [Papenmeier et al., 2019]
investigated the inﬂuence of classiﬁer accuracy and
explanation ﬁdelity on user trust.
They found that
accuracy is more relevant for trust than explanation
quality though both matter.
[Nourani et al., 2019] investigated the impact
of explanations on trust.
Poor explanations in-
deed reduce a user’s perceived accuracy of the
model, independent of its actual accuracy.
Expla-
nations’ helpfulness varies depending on task and
method [Lertvittayakumjorn and Toni, 2019]. Expla-
nations are more helpful in assessing a model’s pre-
dictions compared to its behavior.
Some methods
support some tasks better than others. For instance,
LIME provides the most class discriminating evi-
dence, while the layer-wise relevance propagation
(LRP) method [Bach et al., 2015] helps assess uncer-
tain predictions.
[Adelani et al., 2019] showed how to create and
detect fake online reviews of a pre-speciﬁed senti-
ment. In contrast, we do not generate fake reviews
but only generate misleading justiﬁcations for review
classiﬁcations.
Fake news detection has also been
studied[P´erez-Rosas et al., 2017,
Przybyla, 2020]
based
on
ML
methods
and
linguistic
features
obtained
through
dictionaries.
[P´erez-Rosas et al., 2017, Przybyla, 2020] use a la-
beled data set. Linguistic cues [Ludwig et al., 2016]
such as ﬂattery was used to detect deception in

domain-speciﬁc detection features such as ﬂattery.
Our methods might be valuable for the detection
of fairness and bias – see [Mehrabi et al., 2019] for
a recent overview.
There are attempts to prevent
ML techniques from making decisions based on
certain attributes in the data, such as gender or
race [Ross et al., 2017] or to detect learnt biases
based
on
representations
[Zhang et al., 2018]
or
perturbation
analysis
for
social
associa-
tions [Prabhakaran et al., 2019]. In our case, direct
access to the decision-making system is not possible
— neither during training nor during operations, but
we utilize explanations.
In
human-to-human
interaction,
behavioral
cues
such
as
response
times
[Levine, 2014]
or
non-verbal
leakage
due
to
facial
expres-
sions [Ekman and Friesen, 1969] might have some,
but arguably limited impact [Masip, 2017] on de-
ception detection. In our context, this might pertain,
e.g., to computation time.
We do not use such
information.
Explanations to support deceptions
typically suffer from at least one fallacy such as
”the use of invalid or otherwise faulty reasoning”
[Van Eemeren et al., 2009]. Humans can use numer-
ous techniques to attack fallacies [Damer, 2013],
often based on logical reasoning.
Such techniques
might also be valuable in our context. In particular,
ML techniques have been used to detect lies in human

interaction, eg. [Aroyo et al., 2018].
10
DISCUSSION
Explanations provide new opportunities for de-
ception
(Figure
1)
that
are
expected
to
rise
since
AI
is
becoming
more
pervasive,
more
creative
[Schneider et al., 2022],
personalized
[Schneider and Vlachos, 2021b].
Deceptive expla-
nations might aim at disguising the actual decision
process, e.g., in case it is non-ethical, or make an
altered prediction appear more credible.
While
faithfulness of explanations can be clearly articulated
mathematically using our proposed decision and
explanation ﬁdelity measures, determining when an
explanation is deceptive, is not always as clear, since
it includes a grey area. That is, an explanation might
be said to be deceptive, but it might also only be
judged as inaccurate or simpliﬁed. Thus, deception
detection is not an easy task: While strong deception
is well-recognizable, minor forms are difﬁcult to
detect. Furthermore, some form of domain or model
knowledge is necessary. This could be data similar
or, preferably, identical to the model’s training data
under investigation.
Domain experts could also
provide information in the form of labeled samples
or detection rules, i.e., they can investigate model
outputs and judge them as faithful or deceptive.
Identifying deceptive explanations becomes much
easier if model access and training or testing data are
available, i.e., it reduces to comparing outputs from
models to those suggested by the (training) data.
We recommend regulatory bodies to pass laws that
ensure that auditors have actual model access since
this simpliﬁes the process of deception detection. It
is one step towards ensuring that AI is used for the
social good.
Detection methods will improve, but so will
strategies for lying. Thus, it is important to antici-
pate weaknesses of detection algorithms that deceit-
ful parties might exploit, and mitigate them early
on, e.g., with the aid of generic security meth-
ods [Schlegel et al., ].
The ﬁeld of explainabil-
ity evolves quickly with many challenges ahead
[Meske et al., 2021]. This provides ample opportuni-
ties for future research to assess methods for creation
and detection of deceptive explanations, e.g., methods
explaining features or layers of image processing sys-
tems rather than text [Schneider and Vlachos, 2021a].
11
CONCLUSION
Given economic and other incentives, a new cat
and mouse game between ”liars” and ”detectors” is
emerging in the context of AI. Our work provided
a ﬁrst move in this game: We structured the prob-
lem, and contributed by showing that detection of de-
ception attempts without domain knowledge is chal-
lenging. Our ML models utilizing domain knowledge
through training data yield good detection accuracy,
while unsupervised techniques are only effective for
more severe deception attempts or given (detailed) ar-
chitectural information of the model under investiga-
tion.
