Quantitative methods for Phylogenetic Inference in Historical Linguistics: An experimental case study 
of South Central Dravidian
Taraka Rama, Sudheer Kolachina, Lakshmi Bai B.
ABSTRACT 
In this paper we examine the usefulness of two classes of algorithms  Distance Methods, 
Discrete Character Methods (Felsenstein and Felsenstein 2003) widely used in genetics, for 
predicting the family relationships among a set of related languages and therefore, diachronic 
language change. Applying these algorithms to the data on the numbers of shared cognates-
with-change and changed as well as unchanged cognates for a group of six languages belonging 
to a Dravidian language sub-family given in Krishnamurti et al. (1983), we observed that the 
resultant phylogenetic trees are largely in agreement with the linguistic family tree constructed 
using  the  comparative  method  of  reconstruction  with  only  a  few  minor  differences. 
Furthermore, we studied these minor differences and found that they were cases of genuine 
ambiguity even for a well-trained historical linguist. We evaluated the trees obtained through 
our experiments using a well-defined criterion and report the results here. We finally conclude 
that quantitative methods like the ones we examined are quite useful in predicting family 
relationships among languages. In addition, we conclude that a modest degree of confidence 
attached to the intuition that there could indeed exist a parallelism between the processes of 
linguistic and genetic change is not totally misplaced.
1 Introduction
Ever since the beginning of evolutionary thought, intuitions have been galore about the relevance of the 
process of evolution to Language change. In the field of linguistic theory itself, the idea of “a common 
origin” had existed long before Darwin’s observation of ‘curious parallels’ between the processes of 
biological and linguistic evolution. The birth of comparative philology as a methodology is often attributed 
to that now very well-known observation by Sir William Jones that there existed numerous similarities 
between far-removed languages such as Sanskrit, Greek, Celtic, Gothic and Latin which was impossible 
unless they had ‘sprung from some common source, which perhaps no longer exists’. This observation also 
marked the birth of the Indo-European language family hypothesis. Though Jones may not have been the 
first to suggest a link between Sanskrit and some of the European languages, it was only after his famous 
remarks that explanations for the enormous synchronic diversity of language started assuming a historical 
character.  Up  until  that  point  in  linguistic  theory,  explanations  for  the  similarity  and  therefore,  the 
relationship  between  different  languages  had  been  purely  taxonomic  and  essentially  ahistorical.  See 
Atkinson and Gray (2005) for a very interesting and comprehensive comparative study of the historical 
development of linguistic and biological theory. 
In the history of its development, the field of linguistics in general has crossed paths with biology on 
more than one occasion. One of the most significant interactions between these two disciplines witnessed the 
emergence of the biological nativist school of thought in the last century. Language came to be seen as a 
biological system rather than being a cultural artefact alone. Subsequent to this development but perhaps not 
directly related to it, Language became the object of study of a specialized area that has been referred to as 
Natural Signal Processing in the field of computer science. Attempts to discover the models underlying these 
natural systems were made as part of what was known as model-based analyses. The work that followed 
during  this  period  saw  a  drastic  cross-pollination  of  ideas
 across  different  domains. 
Computational/Quantitative methods proven to be useful in the analysis of a particular natural signal were 

applied to other natural signals and the results were studied. In recent times, one such attempt at cross-
pollination has been the application of quantitative methods developed in the fields of Bioinformatics and 
Computational biology to language data. The intuition is that these methods which infer genetic phylogeny 
(evolutionary tree) from surface gene sequence data can do so from language data too. This would amount to 
saying that the model underlying genetic change is similar to the one underlying language change. In this 
paper, we survey some of these quantitative methods and test their performance for inferring the language 
tree of the South-Central Dravidian (formerly) sub-family from surface data. The goal of our study is to 
validate the use of such methods in Historical linguistics via a comparative study of the trees inferred 
computationally from surface data and the standard linguistic tree constructed on the basis of various 
phonological and morphological isoglosses. 
The outline of this paper is as follows. Section 2 gives the basics and background of various terms used in 
bioinformatics/computational biology for inferring phylogenetic  trees and their  relevance in  historical 
linguistics. Section 3 describes the dataset used in our experiments. Sections 4 describes the distance 
methods and the results of our experiments. Section 5 describes the character based methods and the results. 
We discuss the trees resulting from our experiments and compare them against the linguistically constructed 
tree in section 6 which is followed by conclusion and future work. 
2 Basics and Related Work
The first attempt to apply quantitative methods to the historical study of language was made by the linguist 
Swadesh (1952) when he developed glottochronology and lexicostatistics. However, divergence time 
estimates for languages made using the glottochronological method have come to be seen by linguists as 
unreliable for a host of reasons1. Although much hyped during the initial stages of its development, it was not 
long before historical linguists became disillusioned with this first attempt to employ quantitative methods in 
the study of language relationships. A widespread skepticism about the efficacy of quantitative models that 
predict linguistic relationships from lexical data has prevailed within the historical linguistic community ever 
since. 
However, in recent years, a new set of quantitative techniques emerged in computational biology that 
1
 Lexicostatistical methods infer linguistic relationships based on the number of shared cognates among languages. 
The comparision is done using a basic meaning list which is supposed to be culture-free and universal and hence, 
resistant to borrowing and replacement. This list comprises concepts such as body parts, numerals, elements of 
nature, etc. The first step is to collect the commonly used words in each language for each of these universal 
concepts in this list. In the second step, within the set of words from all the languages corresponding to a concept, 
sets of possible cognates are identified. The cognacy judgements are made on the basis of systematic sound 
correspondences among the words of different languages. Known cases of borrowings are discarded from the list. In 
the third step, the distance between every pair of languages is calculated as the number of cognates shared by those 
two languages. By using techniques like UPGMA, a family tree for a set of languages can be constructed using all 
the pairwise distances. Glottochronology goes one step further and estimates the divergence times for each node in 
the family tree. It assumes that the rate of lexical replacement is constant for all languages at all times. This constant 
is called the glottochronological constant and its value was assumed to be fixed at 0.806 . Swadesh (1952) used the 
following formula to estimate the divergence times of the Amerindian language family 
where r is the glottochronological constant and  c  is the percentage of shared cognates. 
The glottochronological method has been criticised for the following reasons. First, there is a loss of information 
when the character-state data is converted to percentage similarity scores. Second, the case of a language having 
multiple or no words is not handled. Third, the assumption of a universal rate constant is disputable as the rate of 
evolution across languages has been observed to be variable. Fourth, the UPGMA method based on the percentage 
of shared cognates can produce inaccurate branch lengths and thus, lead to erroneous divergence times. In addition, 
the glottochronological method does not address the phenomena of reticulate evolution and parallel development at 
all. For these reasons, historical linguists disapprove of glottochronology as a valid method for the diachronic study 
of language. 

could infer genetic phylogeny from gene sequence data. Researchers soon realized that these methods could 
be applied to language data too. Languages like genetic taxa shared changed traits (changed cognates) and 
language data like genetic data could be represented as state sequences. All of this resulted in a renewed 
interest in the application of quantitative methods to language data. The availability of data sets for well-
established language families like Indo-European (Dyen et al. 1992) has spurred a number of researchers to 
apply these methods to these data sets and validate the resultant phylogenetic trees against the well-
established linguistic facts and to test competing hypotheses. These methods are of two types: character 
based and distance based. We give an overview of the basic terminology in the following section. 
2.1 Terminology
2.1.1 Characters
Language evolution can be seen as a change in some of its features. A  character encodes the similarity 
between languages based on the values of these features and defines an equivalence relation on the set of 
languages L. Defining a character formally (Ringe et al. 2002) 
A character is a function c : L → Z where L is the set of languages and Z is the set of integers.
A character can take different values across a set of languages indicating that these languages have 
different “states” with respect to that character. Two languages would have the same state with respect to a 
particular character if they have the same value for that character. The actual values of these characters are 
not important (Ringe et al. 2002). 
Characters can either be lexical, phonological or morphological features. A lexical character corresponds 
to a meaning slot. For a given meaning, lexical items from different languages fall into different cognate 
classes (based on the cognacy judgments) which are then represented by different states for that lexical 
character. Two languages would have the same state if they have lexical items which are cognates. Figure 1 
shows an example of how lexical characters are represented as states. The superscript shows the state 
exhibited by each language for a particular meaning slot. 
FIGURE 1: An excerpt from the Dyen’s Comparative Indo-European database 
Morphological characters are normally inflectional markers and like lexical items, are coded based on 
cognation.  Phonological characters are used to represent the presence or absence of a particular sound 
change(or a series of sound changes) in a set of languages. 
2.1.2 Homoplasy and Perfect Phylogenies
Two languages can share the same state not only due to shared evolution but also due to phenomena of 
backmutation and parallel development. These phenomena are jointly referred to as homoplasy. For a 
particular character, if an already observed state reappears in the tree, then the phenomenon is called 

backmutation. Two languages may evolve independently in a similar fashion. In that case the two languages 
exhibit the same state despite evolving independently. This phenomenon is known as parallel development. 
Much of the related work in this area was based on the assumption of a homoplasy-free evolution (Ringe et 
al. 2002, Nakhleh et al. 2005b,a). When a character evolves without homoplasy down the tree then it is 
said to be  compatible for that tree and the tree is said to be a  perfect phylogeny. Hence, everytime a 
character’s state changes in the tree, all the subtrees rooted at that point share the same state. Another source 
of ambiguity in the states of a character can be due to borrowing and is normally avoided by discarding all 
known cases of borrowings. 
2.2 Related Work
The  fashion  in  which  characters  evolve  down  the  tree  is  described  by  a  model  of  evolution.  This 
specification or non-specification of models of evolution broadly divides the phylogenetic inference methods 
into two categories. For example, methods such as  Maximum Parsimony,  Maximum Compatibility and 
Distance methods such as Neighbour Joining and UPGMA do not require an explicit model of evolution. But 
other statistical methods like  Maximum Likehood and  Bayesian Inference are parametric methods which 
assume a model of evolution. The parameters of the model are tree topology, branch length and the rates of 
variation across characters. An interesting debate is going on in the scientific community regarding the 
appropriateness of the assumption of a model of evolution for linguistic data (Evans et al. 2004). 
Gray and Jordan (2000) were among the first to apply the Maximum Parsimony method to Austronesian 
language data. They applied the technique to 5,185 lexical items from 77 Austronesian languages and were 
able to get a single most parsimonious tree. The maximum parsimony method returns that tree on which the 
minimum number of character state changes have taken place. There are different types of parsimonies such 
as Wagner, Camin-Sokal, etc and each of them makes different assumptions about the character state 
changes. These parsimonies are discussed in detail in section 5. 
Of particular interest is the work of (Atkinson et al. 2005, Atkinson and Gray 2006) in which they 
applied  Bayesian inference techniques (Huelsenbeck et al. 2001) to the Indo-European database. They 
used a matrix of binary values to represent the states of the languages for the lexical characters. Although 
their tree was identical to the tree established by the historical linguists using the comparative method2, the 
dating based on penalised likelihood supported the famous Anatolian origin hypothesis as opposed to the 
Krugan hypothesis, dating the Indo-European family as being around 8000 years old. Their model assumes 
that the cognate sets evolve independently. They use a gamma distribution to model the variation across the 
cognate sets and try to find a sample of trees which best fits their data. Unlike the other non-parametric 
methods mentioned above, this method can handle polymorphism. By representing cognate information in 
terms of binary matrices (Figure 2), unlike glottochronology, there is no loss of information in this model. 
They also tested their model in scenarios where the cognacy judgements were not completely accurate and 
where the model misspecification could cause a bias in the estimate using an additional data set of ancient 
languages prepared by Ringe et al. (2002). They further tested their model on a synthetic data set which 
allowed for borrowing to occur between different lineages. The model was tested against two kinds of 
borrowing viz- borrowing between any two lineages and borrowing between lineages which are located 
locally. The dating in all the above cases was largely consistent with the dating they had obtained with the 
Dyen’s dataset and this, they claim, demonstrates the robustness of the model. 
Ryder (2006) in his work used syntactic features as characters and applied the above methods for 
inferring the phylogenetic tree for the Indo-European language family. He also used the same techniques on 
various language family data sets for grouping related languages into their respective language families. The 
syntactic features were obtained from the WALS database (Bakker 2004). The assumption underlying the 
use of syntactic features is that the rate at which syntactic features can be replaced is much less than that of 
2
 The position of Albanian is not resolved

lexical features/items. 
FIGURE 2: An example of the binary matrix used by Atkinson and Gray (2006). 
Ringe  et  al.  (2002) proposed  a  computational  technique  called  Maximum  Compatibility for 
constructing phylogenetic trees. This technique seeks to find the tree on which the highest number of 
characters are compatible. Their model assumes that the lexical data is free of back mutation and parallel 
development. The method was applied to a data set of 24 ancient and modern Indo-European languages. 
They use morphological, lexical and phonological characters to infer the phylogeny of these languages. 
Nakhleh et al. (2005a) proposed an extension to this method known as Perfect Phylogenetic Networks 
which models homoplasy and borrowing explicitly. For a comparison of the various phylogenetic methods 
on the ancient Indo-European data, refer  (Nakhleh et al. 2005b). They observed that almost all the 
methods, except UPGMA, produced trees which although partly similar, were strikingly different from one 
another in several ways. It must be noted that these scholars did not seek answers to much-disputed questions 
in the literature on the Indo-European language family tree, such as the status of Albanian in their afore-
mentioned quantitative analyses. In each of the attempts discussed till now, the main thrust has been to 
demonstrate that language phylogeny as inferred using these quantitative methods was in almost perfect 
agreement with the traditional comparative method-based family tree thus demonstrating the utility of 
quantitative methods for the study of language change. 
An earlier attempt to apply quantitative methods to the Dravidian language family data was made by 
Andronov (1964) using glottochronology. His dating of the Dravidian language family divergences was 
criticised  for  the  largely  faulty  data  used  by  him  as  it  made  the  dating  unreliable  and  untenable 
(Krishnamurti 2003). In other related work on the application of quantitative methods to the Dravidian 
language family,  Krishnamurti et al. (1983) used unchanged cognates as a criterion for the subgrouping of 
South-Central Dravidian languages.  Krishnamurti (1978) prepared a list of 63 cognates in all the six 
languages which he determined would be sufficient for inferring the language tree of the family within the 
framework of lexical diffusion. They examined a total of 945 rooted binary trees3 and scored the trees based 
on the number of changes for all the 63 entries. The tree with the least score was the considered the best. 
Another  related  attempt  was  made  by  D’Andrade  (1978) applying  a  technique  called  U-statistic 
hierarchical clustering to the same data set. In both these attempts, the trees obtained using the quantitative 
method/criterion were compared against the standard Dravidian language family tree constructed by Prof. 
Krishnamurti (2003) using the classical comparative method. We reproduce this widely-accepted standard 
tree here in Fig 3. 
3
 

FIGURE 3: Tree constructed using Comparative Method 
In our work, we deliberately avoided the use of lexical characters as they are noise-prone although much 
of the recent work in this area uses lexical characters for phylogenetic inference. Since the goal of our study 
was to evaluate the usefulness/performance of two classes of computational methods for historical linguistic 
tasks, we had to ensure that the data set used in the experiments was highly reliable for the evaluation to be 
accurate. This is why we chose to work with the same set of languages that Krishnamurti et al. (1983) 
studied. We converted the list of 63 changed/unchanged cognates given in that paper into phonological 
character data by treating each cognate as a character. By comparing the trees obtained by applying the 
character-based methods to this phonological character data with the standard tree in Fig 3, we verify the 
usefulness of these methods for phylogenetic inference. 
3 Dataset
We used two different sets of data in our experiments. The data sets contain data from six South-Central 
(Now referred to as South Dravidian II in the recent literature. Refer to Krishnamurti (2003).) group of 
Dravidian Languages - viz. Gondi, Koṇḍa, Kui, Kuvi, Pengo, Manḍa. The first data set is the number of pair-
wise shared cognates-with-change for all language pairs shown below in matrix form. The distance-based 
methods take this matrix as their input (Taken from Krishnamurti et al. (1983)). 
Gondi 
Koṇḍa 
Kui 
Kuvi 
Pengo 
Koṇḍa 
16 
Kui 
18 
18 
Kuvi 
22 
20 
88 
Pengo 
11 
19 
48 
49 
Manḍa 
10 
9 
40 
42 
57 
TABLE 1: Matrix of shared cognates-with-change 
The second data set was taken from Krishnamurti 1983 who provided a list of 63 cognate items which 
were qualified for study within the lexical diffusion framework. For each of these items, we represented 
languages with unchanged cognate as having state ‘0’ and those with changed cognates as having state ‘1’. 
Thus we were able to represent this changed/unchanged cognate data as phonological characters with binary 
states. 

4 Distance Methods
Distance-based methods take as input a matrix containing all the pair-wise distances for a given set of taxa 
(in this case, a set of languages) and output the phylogenetic tree which explains the data. The assumption of 
a lexical clock may or may not be required depending upon the method. In our study we examined two such 
methods which are very popular in evolutionary biology and have also been widely applied to historical 
linguistic
 
data.
UPGMA
 
(Unweighted
 
Pair
 
Group
 
Method
 
with
 
Arithmetic
 
Mean)
The  lexicostatistical  experiment  for  IE  languages  by  Dyen  et al. (1992) used  this  method  for  the 
construction of the family tree. This method can be described by the following psuedo-code: 
1. Find the two closest languages (L1, L2) based on percentage of shared cognates. 
2. Make L1,L2 siblings. 
3. Remove one of them, say L1 from the set. 
4. Recursively construct the tree on the remaining languages. 
5. Make L1 the sibling of L2 in the final tree.
UPGMA assumes a uniform rate of evolution throughout the tree i.e, the distance of the root node to the 
leaves is equal. This algorithm produces a rooted tree whose ancestor (root) is known.
Neighbour Joining (NJ) 
Neighbour Joining is a type of agglomerative clustering developed by Saitou (1987). It is a greedy method 
like UPGMA but unlike UPGMA it does not assume a uniform lexical clock. In addition, this method 
produces an unrooted tree along with the branch lengths which needs to be rooted for inferring the ancestral 
states and the divergence times for the languages. The method starts out with a star-like topology and then 
tries to minimize the estimate of the total length of the tree by combining together the languages that provide 
the maximum reduction. It has been mathematically shown that this method is statistically consistent (In 
other words, if there exists a tree which fits the lexical data perfectly, this method retrieves that tree). There 
are other distance-based methods such as FITSCH and KITSCH (Felsenstein and Felsenstein 2003) which 
are relatives (generalised versions) of UPGMA and NJ but we do not discuss them in this paper. A general 
observation about the class of distance-based methods is that the Neighbour Joining method outperforms all 
other methods in this class. 
4.1 Results for distance methods
The tree structure in figure 3 is the South-Central Dravidian (South Dravidian II) sub-family tree constructed 
by Krishnamurti based on various morphological and phonological isoglosses. The similarity matrix in table 
1 is converted into a distance matrix using the formula 
 . Figures 4 and 5 show the trees 
obtained by applying UPGMA and NJ methods to this pair-wise distance data. 

FIGURE 4: Phylogenetic tree using UPGMA 
FIGURE 5: Phylogenetic tree using Neighbour Joining 
5 Character Methods
Maximum
 
Parsimony
With the exception of Bayesian analysis, Parsimonous methods have been claimed to be the most efficient 
for inferring the tree that is closest to the traditional standard tree (Ringe et al. 2006). There are various 
types of parsimonies depending upon the number of states (binary or multi-state) and the kind of transitions 
between the states. In our study, we limit ourselves to three kinds of parsimonies- Camin-Sokal, Wagner and 
Dollo parsimony. We reproduce the assumptions of each of these parsimonies as given in (Felsenstein and 
Felsenstein
 
2003)
 
here.
 

Assumptions of Camin-Sokal’s and Wagner’s parsimony 
1. Ancestral states are known (Camin-Sokal) or unknown (Wagner). 
2. Different characters evolve independently. 
3. Different lineages evolve independently. 
4. Changes  0 → 1  are much more probable than changes  1 → 0  (Camin-Sokal) or equally probable 
(Wagner). 
5. Both these kinds of changes are a priori improbable over the evolutionary time spans involved in the 
differentiation of the group in question. 
6. Other kinds of evolutionary events such as retention of polymorphism are far less probable than  0 → 1 
changes. 
7. Rates of evolution in different lineages are sufficiently low so that two changes in a long segment of 
the tree are far less probable than one change in a short segment.
We also tested the effect of the hypothesis of the irreversibility of sound change by giving equal chance to 
change in both the directions. While Camin-Sokal parsimony corresponds to the case of sound change being 
irreversible, Wagner parsimony on the other hand, assigns equal probability to the occurrence of a sound 
change in both the directions. 
FIGURE 6: Phylogenetic tree using Wagner’s parsimony 

FIGURE 7: Phylogenetic tree using Wagner’s parsimony 
FIGURE 8: Phylogenetic tree using Camin-Sokal parsimony 
Assumptions of Dollo’s Parsimony 
1. We know which state is the ancestral one (state 0). 
2. The characters evolve independently. 
3. Different lineages evolve independently. 
4. The probability of a forward change (0 → 1) is small over the evolutionary times involved. 
5. The probability of a reversion (1 → 0) is also small, but still far larger than the probability of a forward 
change, so that many reversions are easier to envisage than even one extra forward change. 
6. Retention of polymorphism for both states (0 and 1) is highly improbable. 

7. The lengths of the segments of the true tree are not so unequal that two changes in a long segment are 
as probable as one in a short segment.
Dollo’s parsimony is based on Dollo’s law which states that traits can evolve only once. In this context, the 
evidence of cognates which represent the process of diffusion of sound change still in process, can be treated 
as trait. This is equivalent to stating that sound change is homoplasy free. In other words, Sound change has 
diffused across the languages at a common stage in their evolution rather than occur at a later stage when the 
languages have diverged. This kind of parsimony also allows for determining the root of the tree. 
FIGURE 9: Phylogenetic tree using Dollo’s parsimony 
FIGURE 10: Phylogenetic tree using Dollo’s parsimony 
Bayesian Inference of Phylogenies
This is a different class of character-based methods which is an extension of the maximum likelihood 
method. We used Metropolis-coupled Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) for sampling the posterior 
probabilities of the trees. This method was employed by Atkinson et al. (2005) and has been discussed in 
some detail in the related Work section. We experimented with different parameter settings and observed 
their effect on the inferred trees. We tried using two priors, one a fixed shape parameter (α) and the other a 

uniform distribution. The results did not vary much when we changed the priors. MCMC runs n chains out of 
which n-1 chains are heated. A heated chain has the steady-state distribution 
 
 with 
 where T  is the temperature, i  is the number of the chains, π is the posterior distribution 
and β is the power to which the posterior probability of each heated chain is raised. The chains are heated in 
an incremental fashion and after each iteration, the states of two randomly picked chains i and j are swapped 
with the following probability 
Inferences or sampling is usually done on the cold chain with β = 1 and T  = 0.20 and the number of chains n 
= 4 . We ran two independent analyses and the chains were kept running until the average deviation of the 
split frequencies between the two analyses was less than 0.01. The first 25% of the analyses were thrown out 
as part of the burn-in. 
6 Discussion
We  compared  the  trees  resulting  from  our  experiments  with  the  traditional  tree  topology  given  by 
Krishnamurti. First we discuss the trees obtained using distance-based methods which take the number of 
shared cognates (table 1) as input. To our surprise, UPGMA which is less sophisticated outputted the tree 
that best matches the data in table 1. In his 1983 paper, Krishnamurti briefly cites the issues that were 
pointed out to him in the Fig 3. The tree makes 40 predictions out of which 37 are correct and 3 are wrong. 
The wrong predictions are 1) Kuvi should be closer to Koṇḍa than it is to Gondi. This prediction is wrong as 
Kuvi shares 20 innovative items with Koṇḍa but 22 with Gondi 2) Koṇḍa should be closer to Manḍa than it 
is to Gondi. However, Koṇḍa shares only 9 items with Manḍa but as many as 16 items with Gondi which 
makes this prediction wrong. 3) Manḍa should be closer to Koṇḍa than it is to Gondi. This last prediction 
also turns out to be wrong since Manḍa shares 10 items with Gondi but only 9 items with Gondi. All these 
wrong predictions are absent in the tree given by UPGMA as Gondi and Koṇḍa are placed under the same 
subtree. The other 37 correct predictions were not listed by Krishnamurti and hence could not verified in the 
UPGMA tree. However, as the UPGMA tree excepting the placement of Gondi and Koṇḍa is identical to the 
tree given by Krishnamurti, there is good reason to believe that the UPGMA tree is also able to succesfully 
make these correct predictions. Interestingly, the other distance-based method which is the neighbour joining 
method infers a tree which is identical to the one obtained by Krishnamurti using two sound changes4. 
Neighbour joining method returned an unrooted tree which we rooted treating Gondi as the outgroup. 
The results obtained in the next set of experiments using character-based methods on phonological 
character representation of unchanged cognates yielded trees which are largely in conformity with the 
standard tree in Fig 3. (Compare Figs 6, 7, 8, 9 with Fig 3) We employed three different kinds of parsimony 
and  each  of  them outputted  similar  trees.  Wagner’s  and  Dollo’s  parsimonies  returned  the  two  most 
parsimonious  trees  whereas  Camin-Sokal’s  parsimony  returned  only  one  tree.  The  trees  returned  by 
Wagner’s and Dollo’s parsimonies are alike. Each of the parsimonious methods returned a tree which is 
identical  to  the  standard  tree  constructed  using  the  comparative  method.  The  tree  selected  using 
Krishnamurti’s scoring criterion and the one returned by the Camin-Sokal parsimony are identical. The 
lowest scoring tree selected using Krishnamurti’s scoring criterion has a score of 71 and so do all the trees 
returned by these various parsimonies. Both Wagner’s and Dollo’s parsimonies returned an extra tree which 
had a score of 71. The extra tree returned by Wagner’s and Dollo’s parsimonies is actually ranked as the 
second best using Krishnamurti’s scoring criterion. This is actually an important result as the relaxation of 
the irreversibility of sound change constraint gives two trees with the same score5. This indicates that as far 
4
 Please refer to the appendix of Krishnamurti’s 1983 paper for the sound changes
5
 Wagner’s parsimony-Sound change is equiprobable in both directions

as character-based quantitative methods are concerned, the irreversibility hypothesis can be safely dispensed 
with. In the case of Dollo’s parsimony, the main assumption is that a new trait is very difficult to acquire but 
very easy to loose. In other words, it is easier for a language to revert to an older sound than to undergo a 
new sound change. This method also returned an extra tree which is identical to the one ranked second by 
Krishnamurti. 
In fact, Krishnamurti’s intuitive tree selection criterion developed in his 1983 work is a precursor to the 
various parsimony methods that have become so popular in different areas of research. Krishnamurti’s 
assumptions are similar to the assumptions  made  by Camin-Sokal parsimony.  We  used Camin-Sokal 
parsimony to score the tree returned by UPGMA and obtained a score of 79. Examining the trees returned by 
the Bayesian analysis, we observed that it essentially returns a tree identical to the one returned by the 
neighbour joining method but with ternary branching- Gondi, Koṇḍa and the other languages as branches. 
There is a general ambiguity about the grouping of Manḍa and Pengo as well as that of Kui and Kuvi. All 
these issues surfaced in Krishnamurti et al (1983) too where the explanation put forth in section 4.3 was that 
this discrepancy resulted from the very nature of the sound change C26. Thus, we observed that cases where 
the trees inferred using the quantitative methods differed from the standard tree constructed using the 
comaparative method, were in fact, cases of genuine ambiguity even to the historical linguist. The branch 
lengths returned by all the methods agree upon the fact that Gondi diverged earlier than the other languages 
and is followed by Koṇḍa. 
7 Conclusion and Future Work
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time ever that methods from bioinformatics and computational 
biology have been applied to Dravidian language data for phylogenetic inference. On the basis of a 
comparison of the resulting trees with the standard tree and also the trees found in other earlier work, we 
seek to evaluate the performance of these methods for phylogenetic inference. The trees inferred using the 
different quantitative methods are largely in agreement with the linguistic facts. Character-based methods 
outperformed the distance-based methods going by Krishnamurti’s scoring criterion. In fact, the performance 
of the distance-based methods is itself quite decent. The UPGMA tree rightly rules out the wrong predictions 
cited by Krishnamurti. Since we ensured that the data was noise-free by using well-known data sets carefully 
prepared by an expert, we can unambiguously claim that the good performance of these quantitative methods 
is a reflection of their usefulness for the historical linguistic task of phylogenetic inference. In addition to 
correctly inferring the structure of the family tree, these methods have an added advantage of being able to 
return the branch lengths in a tree. These branch lengths can be used to calibrate the divergence times of the 
tree and can throw light upon the antiquity of the Dravidian language family although such dating should be 
done with sufficient attention to detail and more importantly, under the supervision of a trained linguist to 
prevent spurious dates. We could not address the issue of dating as we lack the required expertise. We hope 
that dates estimated using qunatitative methods such as the ones discussed in our work become a kind of 
starting point for a detailed investigation into the antiquity of the Dravidian language family. The results of 
our experiments also validate the hypothesis that Language being a natural system, the processes underlying 
it are the same as those underlying any other natural system and hence, there could exist a parallelism 
between language change and genetic change. 
We conclude with the remark that quantitative methods such as the ones we surveyed can reliably infer 
language phylogeny and certainly merit consideration in Historical linguistics. However, it must also be 
mentioned that the phylogenetic trees outputted by these methods must not be treated as the final word on 
Language phylogeny and need to be linguistically verified at every stage. In fact, we would recommend that 
these methods be tried out by researchers in historical linguistics on different data sets under the close 
6
C2: CVL > CLV > LV.

supervision of experts so that their veracity can be better ascertained.
