Evaluating navigational RDF queries over the Web
Jorge Baier, Dietrich Daroch, Juan L. Reuter, Domagoj Vrgoˇc
Pontiﬁca Universidad Cat´olica de Chile and Center for Semantic Web Research
ABSTRACT
Semantic Web, and its underlying data format RDF, lend themselves
naturally to navigational querying due to their graph-like structure.
Tis is particularly evident when considering RDF data on the
Web, where various separately published datasets reference each
other and form a giant graph known as the Web of Linked Data.
And while navigational queries over singular RDF datasets are
supported through SPARQL property paths, not much is known
about evaluating them over Linked Data. In this paper we propose
a method for evaluating property path queries over the Web based
on the classical AI search algorithm A*, show its optimality in the
open world seting of the Web, and test it using real world queries
which access a variety of RDF datasets available online and that
are not necessarily known in advance.
ACM Reference format:
Jorge Baier, Dietrich Daroch, Juan L. Reuter, Domagoj Vrgoˇc. 2016. Evalu-
ating navigational RDF queries over the Web. In Proceedings of , , , 10 pages.
DOI: 10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1
INTRODUCTION
Te Resource Description Framework (RDF) [30] is the World Wide
Web consortium (W3C) standard for representing Semantic Web
data. In essence, an RDF graph is a set of triples of internationalised
resource identiﬁers (IRIs), where the ﬁrst and last of them represent
entity resources, and the middle one relates these resources, just
as is it done in graph databases [4]. Te oﬃcial query language for
RDF databases is SPARQL [15].
To answer the need for including navigational features into
SPARQL, the latest version of the language includes property paths,
a set of queries that can be seen as the analogues of established
graph database languages such as regular path queries and two-way
regular path queries [11]. Consequently, property paths are already
supported by the vast majority of existing SPARQL engines (e.g.,
[10, 24, 37]). Te inclusion of navigational queries is also present
in most other graph database models (see e.g. [4, 7]).
Besides the traditional approach where one issues a query over a
(set of) graph databases, the community has further raised the need
for a fundamentally diﬀerent way of querying RDF data: to obtain
answers of queries over the whole corpus of RDF data present on the
Web and linked together into what is known as the Web of Linked
Data, in a distributed way and without assuming any mediation
nor centralised organisation in control of the data, following the
Linked Data Principles [9].
Te fundamental property of RDF data that makes this querying
possible is that the IRIs in RDF documents published online should
be dereferenceable. Tis basically means that by accessing any given
IRI, we obtain a new RDF document describing its neighbourhood
(or a part of it) in the Linked Data graph. Let us explain how this
,
2016. 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM...$15.00
DOI: 10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
works using the online RDF documents published by DBLP, one
of the simplest datasets now forming part of the Web of Linked
Data. In the RDF representation of DBLP, each researcher is given a
unique IRI, as well as each paper. Te authorship relation indicating
that an author A wrote a paper P is then represented by the triple
{P, dc:creator,A}. Te IRI for each author, then serves as a good
starting point for investigating the DBLP dataset, as dereferenc-
ing their IRI will intuitively give us all the papers writen by this
author. For example, if we dereference the IRI M.Stonebraker, rep-
resenting Michael Stonebraker, we obtain a document containing,
amongst other things, the following triples
M.Stonebraker
foaf:name
“M. Stonebraker”
inTods:StonebrakerWKH76
dc:creator
M.Stonebraker
inSigmod:PavloPRADMS09
dc:creator
M.Stonebraker
Tese triples indicate that M.Stonebraker is the author of
the papers represented by IRIs inTods:StonebrakerWKH76 and
inSigmod:PavloPRADMS09, and that the name of the entity repre-
sented by M.Stonebraker is indeed “Michael Stonebraker”. Sup-
pose now that we need to retrieve the names of all the co-authors
of Michael Stonebraker. It is very easy to do this using the linked
data infrastructure: We ﬁrst dereference the IRI M.Stonebraker,
obtaining an RDF document that contains, in particular, a triple
{P, dc:creator, M.Stonebraker} for each paper P authored by M.
Stonebraker. Ten we just need to dereference each of the IRIs of
these papers: dereferencing each of these IRIs P gives us triples of
the form {P, dc:creator,A}, and now we know that A is a coau-
thor of M. Stonebraker. Te last step is to further dereference the IRI
of each of these researchers, to look for a triple {A, foaf:name, N }
that indicates the name of the researcher (in this case N).
Of course, the query looking for co-authors of Michael Stone-
braker can be seen as a ﬁxed patern: namely, it is a path of length
two, starting in the IRI M.Stonebraker and traversing the edge
dc:creator backwards (thus reaching a paper writen by Michael
Stonebraker), and then traversing the dc:creator edge forwards
to reach one of his co-authors. But what happens when we want to
generalise this query and obtain the collaboration reach of Michael
Stonebraker, that is, his co-authors, the co-authors of his co-authors,
their co-authors, etc? Tis is similar to the popular notion of Erd˝os
number, but this time starting with a diﬀerent author. To answer
such a query a ﬁxed length path will no longer suﬃce, since we do
not know the distance between the starting node and the ending
node in advance. We therefore need to use property paths; in this
case this would be done using the query
M.Stonebraker
(ˆdc:creator/dc:creator)*
?x,
which repeats the simple path from one author to a paper (using
ˆdc:creator to follow an edge labelled dc:creator in a reverse
direction) and then to another author (using dc:creator) an arbi-
trary number of times, as signiﬁed by the star operator *. Te idea
is as before, but now once a co-author is retrieved, search does not
stop, but continues with this (co-)author as the starting node.
arXiv:1701.06454v2  [cs.DB]  14 Mar 2017

, ,
Jorge Baier, Dietrich Daroch, Juan L. Reuter, Domagoj Vrgoˇc
When evaluating these queries we have only dereferenced and
fetched the documents that we needed in order to answer the query,
and thus we are taking full advantage of the nature of Linked Data.
Tere is another fundamental advantage of this approach: we can
cross between diﬀerent domains without any eﬀort by using the
infrastructure of the Web, which happens when a dereferenced
IRI links to another IRI residing on a diﬀerent server. Tis is in
contrast with, for instance, issuing a single distributed query to
a centralised endpoint, since we can access an arbitrary number
of diﬀerent sources. Furthermore, we can access data that is not
published on dedicated endpoints; all that we need is data published
on the standard Web architecture. Up to our best knowledge, this
framework of distributed, decentralised and ungoverned querying
has not been considered before the advent of Linked Data.
Te advantages of these approaches have led the Semantic Web
community to investigate the fundamentals of querying over the
Web [18], and developing algorithms for answering SPARQL queries
over Linked Data [19, 35]. Unfortunately, despite the potential that
property paths could have in Web querying, most of the algorithms
developed in this context focus on the patern matching features of
SPARQL, and do not consider property paths. Indeed, the majority
of studies about property paths only consider how they work over
a single centralised dataset [5, 14, 26, 38]. And while the need
for understanding how property paths might work over the Web
has repeatedly been raised by the research community [8, 20, 21],
previous studies have mostly focused on understanding appropriate
semantics and/or proposing new languages to help users navigate
the Web, instead of describing the algorithms computing these
answers. Te only exception is [13], suggesting a basic depth-ﬁrst
search algorithm in the context of NautiLOD queries: a language
proposal that extends property paths. Terefore, the main objective
of this paper is to answer the question: How can one eﬃciently
evaluate property path queries over the Web of Linked Data?
Contributions. Our main contribution is an algorithm for eﬃ-
ciently retrieving answers to property path queries over Linked
Data. Our solution is based on the observation that evaluating
property paths can be seen as a search problem over an initially
unknown graph. Indeed, in the examples above we start from one
known IRI (M.Stonebraker) and begin exploring its neighbours
guided by the query we are trying to answer. But this problem has
been well studied by the Artiﬁcial Intelligence community, and it
is generally agreed that the most appropriate solution here is an
heuristic-search algorithm such as A* [16, 31]. In this paper we
propose a variant of A* for the seting of Linked Data by using the
property path we are trying to answer as a heuristic to guide our
search. Te main advantages of this approach are the following:
- It allows to overcome shortcomings of basic graph traversal
algorithms such as depth-ﬁrst search (DFS) and breadth-ﬁrst
search (BFS). In fact, we show that A* dominates BFS and DFS,
and that it is optimal with respect to the part of the graph that
became available during the search. Tis, in some sense, is the
best we can hope for in the open-world seting of the Web.
- It does not only allow to ﬁnd pairs of nodes connected by a
property path, but it can also return (one of the) shortest paths
which witness this connection: a feature that existing SPARQL
engines are currently lacking.
- It is very robust when evaluating property paths live over the
Web infrastructure, and can ofen answer queries which fail even
on SPARQL implementations executed over a local dataset.
Apart from describing the basic implementation of the A* al-
gorithm and proving its optimality, we also develop several op-
timisations geared towards query answering in the Linked Data
seting. Most notably, we show that dereferencing multiple IRIs
in parallel can speed up the computation of property paths signiﬁ-
cantly. Finally, we describe how our implementation runs over the
Web of Linked data using a number of real-world queries which
utilise diﬀerent RDF datasets. We compare our approach to BFS
and DFS-based algorithms and their parallel versions, showing that
A* is superior when it comes to querying over the Web.
Outline. We formalise Linked Data and property paths in Section
2. In Section 3 we describe how DFS and BFS can be used to answer
property path queries and what are their shortcomings. In Section
4 we introduce the A* algorithm and show its optimality. Optimi-
sations are presented in Section 5, and real-world experiments in
Section 6. We conclude in Section 7.
2
PRELIMINARIES
RDF graphs. Let I and L be countably inﬁnite disjoint sets of
IRIs and literals, respectively. An RDF triple is a triple (s,p,o) from
(I ∪L) × I × (I ∪L), where s is called subject, p predicate, and o
object. An (RDF) graph is a ﬁnite set of RDF triples. For simplicity
we only deal with RDF documents that do not contain blank nodes.
Linked Data. We are interested in computing navigational queries
over the wide body of RDF documents published on the Web that
comprise what is known as the Web of Linked Data. As customary
in the literature (see e.g. [3, 17]), we treat this corpus of documents
as a tuple W = (G, adoc), where G is a set of RDF graphs and
adoc : I →G ∪{∅} is a function that assigns graphs in G to
some IRIs, and the empty graph to the rest of the IRIs. Note that
previous work (e.g. [17]) usually deﬁnes adoc as a partial function.
We adopt instead the convention that adoc(u) = ∅whenever adoc
is not deﬁned for u, as it simpliﬁes the presentation.
Te intuition behind this deﬁnition is that G represents the
set of documents on the Web of Linked data, and adoc captures
dereferencing; that is, adoc(u) gives us the neighbours of u in G.
Note that G is usually not available and has to be retrieved by
looking up IRIs with adoc.
Example 2.1. We can now formalise the operations performed in
the introduction over the linked data architecture of DBLP. Starting
with the IRI M.Stonebraker, we can invoke adoc on this IRI to
fetch its associated graph
adoc(M.Stonebraker) =


M.Stonebraker
foaf:name
“M. Stonebraker”
inSigmod:PavloPRADMS09
dc:creator
M.Stonebraker
...
...
...
When looking for the coauthors of M. Stonebraker, we might
want to fetch adoc(inSigmod:PavloPRADMS09), which will give
us a graph containing, amongst other things, triples of the form
(inSigmod:PavloPRADMS09, dc:creator,A), with A being the IRI

Evaluating navigational RDF queries over the Web
, ,
of the authors of the paper. To get the name of A we fetch the graph
adoc(A) and look for the triple with foaf:name as the predicate.
Property Paths. Navigational queries over graph databases com-
monly ask for paths that satisfy certain properties. Te most simple
of them correspond to regular path queries, or RPQs [2, 12], which
select pairs of nodes connected by a path conforming to a reg-
ular expression, and 2-way regular path queries, or 2RPQs [11],
which extend RPQ with the ability to traverse an edge backwards.
SPARQL features a class of navigational queries known as property
paths, which are themselves an extension of the well known class of
2RPQs. For readability we assume we deal only with 2RPQs, adopt-
ing the formalisation in [26]. Note however that our algorithms
(and our implementation) work for all property path expressions.
Formally, we deﬁne property paths by the grammar
e := u | e−| e1 · e2 | e1 + e2 | e∗| e?,
where u is an IRI in I. Te semantics of property paths, denoted by
JeKG, for a property path e and an RDF graph G, is shown below.
JaKG = {(s, o) | (s, a, o) ∈G },
Je−KG = {(s, o) | (o, s) ∈JeKG },
Je1 · e2KG = Je1KG ◦Je2KG,
Je1 + e2KG = Je1KG ∪Je2KG,
Je∗KG =
Ø
i≥1
JeiKG ∪{(a, a) | a is a term in G },
Je?KG = JeKG ∪{(a, a) | a is a term in G }.
Here ◦is the usual composition of binary relations, and ei is the
concatenation of i copies of e.
2.1
Evaluating Property Paths via Automata
As in the case of the query computing the coauthor reach of M.
Stonebraker, one is usually interested in computing all the IRIs that
can be reached from a starting IRI u by means of a property path
expression. Formally, we study the following problem.
Problem:
PPComputation
Input:
Property Path e, RDF graph G, starting IRI u
Output:
All IRIs v such that (u,v) ∈JeKG
Alternatively, one may wish to compute the full evaluation JeKG
of pairs connected via a path conforming to e. However, this op-
eration is seldom used in practice: it is not an intuitive query to
ask, and when using property paths in SPARQL one usually obtains
starting points from other paterns or joins of paterns. Also, com-
puting the full JeKG is not even supported in all SPARQL systems
(for instance Virtuoso allows only property paths with a starting
point). Furthermore, as we will see in the following sections, in
the open world seting of Linked Data it is only natural to have a
starting point for our search, since it is unrealistic to expect the
computation to traverse and manipulate the entire Web graph. Tis
is why we chose to focus on PPComputation.
To solve the PPComputation problem, the theoretical literature
proposed a simple algorithm based on automata theory. To present
this algorithm, note ﬁrst that our property paths are nothing more
than regular expressions over the alphabet I± = I ∪{u−| u ∈I}
that contains all IRIs and their inverses. Tus, for each property
path e we can construct a nondeterministic ﬁnite state automaton
(NFA) Ae over I± that accepts the same language as e, when viewed
as a regular expression. We can now show:
Proposition 2.2 ([11, 12, 26]). PPComputation can be solved in
O(|G| · |e|) (thus linear in both the size of the graph and the query).
Te idea is as follows. Let G be an RDF graph, e a property
path expression and u an IRI. First, we construct the automaton
Ae = (Qe, I±,q0e, Fe,δe) equivalent to the query e, where Qe is the
set of states, q0e is the initial state, F is the set of ﬁnal states and
δe ⊆Qe × I± × Qe is the transition relation. Next, from G and
Ae we construct the labelled product graph G × Ae whose nodes
come from I × Qe, and there is an edge from a node (u1,q1) to
a node (u2,q2) labelled with a ∈I if and only if (i) G contains a
triple (u1,a,u2) and (ii) the transition relation δe contains the triple
(q1,a,q2), that is, if in Ae one can advance from q1 to q2 while
reading a. Similarly, there is an edge between (u1,q1) and (u2,q2)
labelled with a−∈I−if (i) (u2,a,u1) ∈G and (ii) (q1,a−,q2) ∈δe.
It is now not diﬃcult to show the following property:
Lemma 2.3 ([12]). A pair (u,v) belongs to JeKG if and only if there
is a path from (u,q0e) to (v,qf
e ) in the labelled graph G × Ae, where
qf
e ∈Fe is a ﬁnal state of Ae.
We can now solve the PPComputation problem by traversing
the product graph G × Ae starting in (u,q0e) and returning all the
IRIs v such that we encounter a node (v,qf
e ), with qf
e ∈Fe, during
our traversal. Tus, in a sense, one can recast the problem of query
computation (in a single graph) as the problem of searching for all
connected ﬁnal nodes in the product graph. Tis duality between
evaluation and search is a crucial component of our approach for
querying multiple graphs on the Web of Linked Data.
3
COMPUTING PROPERTY PATHS OVER
THE WEB
When computing the answer of a property path over the Web, we
cannot simply rely on the algorithm outlined in Section 2.1, because
this assumes that we have our entire graph in memory, which is
not a feasible option for the case of the Web. Having a starting
IRI u comes in handy here, as we can emulate the algorithm from
Section 2.1 by dereferencing u, retrieving its neighbours in adoc(u),
and continuing from there, thus building a local copy of a portion
of the Web graph needed to answer the query.
To formalise this, let us deﬁne the Web graph GWeb as the RDF
graph consisting of the union Ð
u ∈I adoc(u) of all the graphs result-
ing by dereferencing an IRI in I (i.e. the complete Web of Linked
Data). From here onwards we assume that adoc(u) gives us the
neighbours of u in the Web graph (see Section 5.2 for a discussion
of how to deal with the shortcomings of the current Linked Data
infrastructure). Te problem we are now interested in is solving
PPComputation above for the graph GWeb, i.e. the problem:
Problem:
PP over the Web
Input:
Property Path e, starting IRI u
Output:
All IRIs v such that (u,v) ∈JeKGWeb
Now, although the approach of Section 2.1 would require us to
do our search over GWeb × Ae, we can recast PP over the Web
as ﬁnding paths inside a subgraph GP ⊂GWeb × Ae which is

, ,
Jorge Baier, Dietrich Daroch, Juan L. Reuter, Domagoj Vrgoˇc
constructed dynamically by dereferencing IRIs starting at u. And
although the graph GP might be much smaller (in fact, we can
stop constructing it when we desire), selecting the best algorithm
for producing this graph and doing path searching over it is not
an obvious task, due to the following issues not occurring in the
classical path-ﬁnding seting.
First, path-ﬁnding algorithms are designed to work with graphs
that can be either stored in memory or generated eﬃciently. In
contrast, graph GP is generated by dereferencing IRIs which in-
volves resolving a number of HTTP requests. Te time required
to complete a request dominates signiﬁcantly the time required to
carry out any operation performed in memory. Eﬃcient algorithms
for this problem should therefore aim at reducing network requests,
a factor that is usually not considered when solving path-ﬁnding
problems. Te second issue is that here we are interested in more
than one solution. As such, an algorithm that returns answers
incrementally seems to be a more sensible option than one that
computes all answers prior to returning any.
Next, we discuss how classical path-ﬁnding algorithms can be
modiﬁed to return answers to property path queries over the Web
and pinpoint some of their shortcomings in this seting.
3.1
Depth-First Search
Depth-First Search (DFS) is an easy-to-implement path-ﬁnding algo-
rithm that can be used to solve the PP over the Web problem. On
input a starting IRI u and an automaton Ae over I±, the algorithm
begins a search over the graph GWeb × Ae starting with the node
init = (u,q0e), where q0e is the initial node of Ae. Te goal of the
algorithm is to look for nodes of the form (v,qf ), with v an IRI and
qf a ﬁnal state of Ae; this is commonly known as the goal condition
of the algorithm. At every moment during execution, the algorithm
maintains a search frontier (or Open list) implemented as a stack.
At initialisation, the frontier is set to only contain the start node
init. In the main loop, a node s is extracted from the frontier and
expanded by computing its neighbours in GWeb × Ae, by means of
the function Neighbours. All neighbouring goal nodes are returned,
and then all neighbours that have not been previously added to the
frontier are now inserted at the top of the frontier. Te algorithm
terminates unsuccessfully if the frontier empties.
A pseudo code for DFS is presented in Algorithm 1. Note that we
need Open to be a stack for DFS (Line 7). Observe additionally that
the algorithm does not return a path but rather a node from which
a path can be obtained by following the so-called parent pointers
(set in Line 11). Finally, observe that in the context of navigational
query answering, computing the neighbours of a node (function
Neighbours) needs IRI dereferencing (set in Line 16) which in turn
requires network communication, an operation that may take sig-
niﬁcantly more time than others carried out by the algorithm, such
as data management.
Tere are three properties of DFS that are important for query
answering. First, DFS can be easily modiﬁed to return paths in-
crementally instead of only one path. Indeed, instead of returning
in Line 12, the node just found to be a goal node can be added to
a list of solutions. In the same spirit, one can easily adapt DFS
to return the ﬁrst k solutions by introducing k as an additional
parameter. Second, DFS is complete for ﬁnite graphs: if a goal node
Algorithm 1: Breadth/Depth-First Search
1 function Search(u, Ae)
2
init ←(u, q0
e)
3
init.parent ←null
4
if q0
e ∈Fe then return init or add init to solutions
5
Initialise Open as an empty stack (DFS) or queue (BFS)
6
Initialise Seen as an empty set
7
Insert init into both Open and Seen
8
while Open is not empty do
9
Extract node s = (v, q) from Open and compute Neighbours(s)
10
for each t = (v′, q′) in Neighbours(s) that is not in Seen do
11
t.parent ←s
12
if q′ ∈Fe then return t or add t to solutions
13
Insert t into both Open and Seen
14 function Neighbours((v, q))
15
Initialise Succ as an empty set and RDF graph Gtemp as an empty graph
16
Gtemp ←adoc(v)
17
for each IRI a ∈I and state q′ s.t. (q, a, q′) is in δe do
18
for each triple (v, a, v′) in Gtemp do Insert (q′, v′) into Succ
19
for each IRI a−∈I−and state q′ s.t. (q, a−, q′) is in δe do
20
for each triple (v′, a, v) in Gtemp do Insert (q′, v′) into Succ
21
return Succ
is reachable from init then the algorithm eventually retrieves this
node. Tis is important because it guarantees that all solutions
to a query are eventually returned. Tird, the memory footprint
of DFS is relatively low. Actually, if the depth of the node on top
of the stack is k and the maximum branching factor (number of
neighbours of a node) is b, then the size of Open is O(kb).
To see how DFS works when solving PP over the Web, let
us consider the ﬁrst steps taken when processing the prop-
erty path (dc:creator−· dc:creator)∗, with the starting IRI
M.Stonebraker, which was presented in the introduction. First, let
Ae be the following NFA:
q0
start
q1
dc:creator−
dc:creator
As explained in Lemma 2.3, the starting node for our search
is (M.Stonebraker,q0).
In the ﬁrst iteration we extract this
node from Open, dereference the IRI M.Stonebraker, obtain-
ing, amongst others, the triple (inTods:StonebrakerWKH76,
dc:creator, M.Stonebraker). Tis will allow us to add to our
frontier the node (inTods:StonebrakerWKH76,q1) and we pro-
ceed similarly for other triples in adoc(M.Stonebraker). For the
second iteration, let us assume (inTods:StonebrakerWKH76,q1)
is at the top of the stack.
When expanded, DFS will lookup
adoc(inTods:StonebrakerWKH76) and retrieve, amongst other
things, all nodes connected to inTods:StonebrakerWKH76 by
means of a label dc:creator. Tis, in particular, yields all 4 au-
thors of this paper, but (M.Stonebraker,q0) is not added to Open
because it was already in Seen. For the next iteration DFS takes one
of these nodes, say (G.Held,q0), expands them again, obtaining all
papers of G. Held; the next iteration expands one of these papers,
adds all the authors to the list of answers; and so on.
Algorithm 1 implements a loop detection by preventing the in-
sertion of a previously seen node to Open. Tis is important to
guarantee that the algorithm terminates over a ﬁnite graph and
that the answers are complete. In our case this implies that we
are looking for simple paths, albeit not in the RDF graph but in

Evaluating navigational RDF queries over the Web
, ,
the product graph GWeb × Ae. In practice this implies that our
algorithm looks for paths where the same IRI may be repeated at
most a number of times equivalent to the states of the expression
automata Ae. Completeness of DFS in our context follows from
a simple pumping argument and the fact that property paths are
regular expressions over I±.
Te most notable drawback of DFS is that there is no guaran-
tee on solution quality, and solutions with much shortest paths
may be missed. For instance, in the query above it will return the
co-authors of G. Held, which are at distance two or more from
M. Stonebraker, before returning the other authors of the paper
inTods:StonebrakerWKH76. In practice this means that we would
need many more HTTP requests to retrieve subsequent solutions,
which in turn means more time to compute answers.
3.2
Breadth-First Search
To alleviate the drawbacks of DFS, one could consider instead using
Breadth-First Search (BFS), another complete search algorithm that
is guaranteed to ﬁnd shortest paths. BFS is similar to DFS in most
aspects: it keeps a search frontier (i.e. the Open list) during execu-
tion and in each iteration it extracts a node from the frontier and
then expands it. Te most important diﬀerence is that BFS, instead
of always expanding the deepest node in the frontier, it always
expands the shallowest one. At the algorithmic level, BFS can be
obtained from DFS by simply changing underlying data structure
for Open to a FIFO queue instead of a stack. As such, successors of
a node are always added at the end of the queue, and therefore a
shallow node is always selected for expansion.
However, BFS also suﬀers from an important drawback in our
context: BFS has the potential of needing many iterations to ﬁnd
a ﬁrst solution to the problem. Indeed, assume once again that a
node has at most b neighbours, and imagine that the shortest path
in the search graph has k edges. Ten, all nodes that are reachable
in less than k edges are added to Open which means that O(bk)
iterations are needed before such a path is found.
3.3
Issues with BFS and DFS
Both BFS and DFS have issues with some queries. Consider for
example the following query, starting with M. Stonebraker:
(dc:creator−· dc:creator)∗· dc:creator−· rdfs:label,
that is, intuitively we want to retrieve the papers writen by a
co-author of M. Stonebraker, or by a co-author of some of his co-
authors, and so on. Furthermore, take the realistic assumption
that there are hundreds of IRIs connected via dc:creator−with M.
Stonebraker (indeed, Stonebraker’s DBLP entry, as of the writing
of this paper, contains 298 papers).
Let us now focus on what BFS does with this query. It will ﬁrst
dereference the IRI for Stonebraker, adding the IRI of each of his
298 papers to Open. Ten, it will dereference each of these IRIs,
which requires 298 requests over the network. When each of these
IRIs are expanded, we add to Open the co-authors of Stonebraker.
Only afer all the IRIs for Stonebraker’s papers are expanded, it will
expand the IRI of one Stonebraker’s coauthors, and, immediately
will ﬁnd a solution path.
Waiting for 298 HTTP requests before obtaining the ﬁrst answer
is not sensible: in this case only three requests are needed to ﬁnd
the ﬁrst answer. Indeed, starting from Stonebraker’s IRI, we just
choose the IRI for one of Stonebraker’s papers, we expand such an
IRI, from where we choose the IRI of one of his co-author’s. Afer
dereferencing the later IRI we ﬁnd the ﬁrst solution.
DFS has diﬀerent yet important issue with this very same query.
To ﬁnd a ﬁrst solution, DFS actually does the minimum amount
of eﬀort, dereferencing the minimum number of IRIs, as described
above. Te issue appears when looking for the answers that follow
the ﬁrst. Because the focus of DFS is depth, when executed over
DBLP, the 5th answer of our query has length 6, the next 4 answers
have length 12, and the following ones 32 and up. Tis implies that
DFS will incur in more computation time to retrieve these answers,
as well as more htp requests. Moreover, returning these lengthy
paths ﬁrst does not seem intuitively right, as we normally want to
display simpler, shorter paths ﬁrst. Indeed, it is not hard to contrive
examples in which the length of solutions increases much faster
than in our examples, even when many shorter solutions exist.
What we need is a good balance between execution time and
solution quality. In our example, a sensible way to proceed would
be to take the IRI for the ﬁrst paper, look at its authors, list them,
and then proceed likewise with the second paper. Tis balance
has been studied in the area of Heuristic Search, for many years,
producing algorithms that are guided by a heuristic function h, that
is such that h(s) estimates the cost of a path from s to a goal node.
Expansions are signiﬁcantly (usually, exponentially) reduced as one
improves the “quality” of h. Next we discuss the challenges of using
of using heuristic search over Linked Data.
4
AI SEARCH TO THE RESCUE
A* is one of the most simple and well-studied heuristic algorithms
capable of solving path search problems like the one we described
in the previous sections. In this section we study how to apply it to
the problem of answering property paths over the Web.
Te main diﬀerence between A* and the algorithms described
earlier is that the search frontier is a priority queue where the
priority is given by f (s), a function that estimates the cost of a
solution that passes through s [16]. A high-level description of A*
is as follows. At initialisation, the initial node is added to the Open
queue. A* now repeats the following loop: ﬁrst, it extracts a node
with the highest priority from Open. It returns s if it is a goal state;
otherwise, it expands s to obtain its neighbours, adds them to Open
and continues execution. Next we give a formal description of A*.
Te search graph of A* is implicitly described by (1) a start node
sstart; (2) a set of actions Act; (3) a partial successor function Succ,
such that Succ(a,s), if deﬁned, returns a set S of successor nodes;
(4) a goal condition, which is a boolean function over nodes—goal
nodes are those nodes for which this function returns true; (5) a non-
negative cost function c between successor nodes. Te objective of
the algorithm is to ﬁnd a path from sstart to a goal node.
An additional argument required by A* is a heuristic function
h, which is a non-negative function over nodes such that h(s) is
an estimate of the cost of a path that starts in s and reaches a goal
node. Te heuristic is key to the performance of A*. An empirically
well-known fact is that as h is more accurate, time savings can be
very big because expansions are signiﬁcantly reduced. It can be
proven that when h is admissible, that is, for every s it holds that

, ,
Jorge Baier, Dietrich Daroch, Juan L. Reuter, Domagoj Vrgoˇc
Algorithm 2: Te A* Algorithm
1 procedure A*
2
Closed ←empty set
3
Open ←empty priority queue ordered by f atribute
4
д(sstart) ←0
5
f (sstart) ←h(sstart)
6
Insert sstart into Open
7
while Open , ∅do
8
Extract s from Open
9
if s is a goal node then
10
return s or add s to list of solutions
11
Expand(s)
12 procedure Expand (s)
13
Insert s into Closed
14
for each a in Act such that Succ(a, s) is deﬁned do
15
for each s′ in Succ(a, s) do
16
t ←s′
17
if t is not in Seen then
18
Add t to Seen
19
д(t) ←∞
20
cost ←д(s) + c(s, t)
21
if cost < д(t) then
22
д(t) ←cost
23
f (t) ←д(t) + h(t)
24
parent(t) ←⟨s, a⟩
25
if t is a goal and f (t) ≤f (top(Open)) then
26
return t or add t to list of solutions
27
if t < Open then Insert t in Open
28
else Update priority of t in Open
h(s) does not overestimate the cost of any path from s to a goal
node, then A* ﬁnds a minimum-cost path from sstart to a goal node.
Algorithm 2 shows a pseudo-code for A*. Te priority function
is deﬁned as f (s) = д(s) + h(s), where h is the heuristic function
deﬁned above and д(s) is the cost of the best path found so far
towards s. In an implementation of A*, a hash table is used to store
nodes that have been generated in an expansion (cf. Line 18), and
parent-, д-, h-, and f - values are stored as properties of s.
A ﬁnal and important observation is that A* can be easily mod-
iﬁed to return a sequence of answers, instead of a single one. In
this case, we simply modify the return statement in Line 10 by
something that adds s to a list.
Using A* for computing property paths. Let us show how
we use A* to solve PP over the Web. Tat is, given as inputs
a property path e and a starting IRI u, we look for all v such that
(u,v) ∈JeKGWeb. Let Ae = (Qe, I±,q0e, Fe,δe) be the automata over
I± that is equivalent to e. Recall that (see Lemma 2.3 and Section
3) we can reduce this problem to searching for all nodes (v,qf ), for
an IRI v and a state qf ∈Fe, over the graph GP ⊂GWeb × Ae such
that there is a path from (u,q0e) to (v,qf ). In turn, this problem
can be seen as an A* description where (1) the start node sstart
is (u,q0e); (2) the set Act of actions corresponds to IRIs in I±; (3)
the partial successor function Succ corresponds to the edges of
GWeb × Ae, that is, if s = (u,q), we say (u′,q′) ∈Succ(a,s) if both
(u,a,u′) ∈adoc(u), and (q,a,q′) is a transition in Ae, or if both
(u′,a,u) ∈adoc(u), and (q,a−,q′) is a transition in Ae; (4) a node
s = (v,q) is a goal if q ∈Fe; and (5) the cost function is 1 for each
pair of nodes connected by Succ.
Tere is an important subtlety that distinguishes our algorithm
from classical A* applications. Just as in the case of BFS and DFS,
q0
start
q1
q2
dc:creator−
dc:creator
dc:creator−
Figure 1: An automaton ﬁnding papers of the co-authors of
M. Stonebraker.
the successors of (u,q) must be obtained by dereferencing an IRI
(using, for example, the function Neighbours from Algorithm 1).
Tis again means that the most costly operation is the expansion of
new successor nodes, and as such any implementation of A* must
try their best to ﬁnd a way of reducing this botleneck. We explain
how to do this in Section 5.1. But before, let us see how to choose a
good heuristic function in our scenario.
4.1
A Heuristic for Navigational Qeries
Heuristic functions are essential for the performance of A*. We also
want A* to be optimal, so our heuristic must be admissible, that is,
it should not overestimate the cost of path to a goal node.
Let A be an automaton over I±. Our heuristic for this problem
is deﬁned as follows: for all nodes (v,q) over I ×Qe, where Qe are
the states of Ae, we deﬁne h((v,q)) as the minimum distance from
q to a ﬁnal state of Ae (and as ∞if no path from q to a ﬁnal state
exists). To illustrate our heuristic consider Figure 1, corresponding
to the automaton of the query for papers of the coauthor reach of M.
Stonebraker introduced in Section 3.3. Ten we deﬁne h(u,q1) = 2,
h(u,q0) = 1, and h(u,q2) = 0, for every u ∈I. Usually h(u,q) is
implemented as a simple lookup in a table. Given an automaton A
we denote the heuristic deﬁned as described above by hA.
Our heuristic hAe is admissible for each property path e, as long
as Ae is the minimum NFA for e. To see this, note that the minimum
number of actions required to reach a goal node from node (u,q)
cannot exceed the number of edges of a shortest path between the
automaton state q and a ﬁnal state. Tis is because each successor
(u′,q′) of node (u,q) must be such that there is an edge between q
and q′ in the automaton’s graph.
4.2
Teoretical Guarantees
A well-known property of A* is that is ﬁnds cost-optimal (i.e., short-
est) paths. Here we provide an optimality result of the same sort.
Now, because the function adoc(u) is not necessarily guaranteed
to return all triples containing u, we cannot show optimality over
the entire Web, but rather only over the graph we have already
discovered, that we denote by GA*.
Formally, given an execution of A*, the labelled graph GA* ⊂
GWeb × Ae contains the edge (s,a,s′) iﬀ(1) s ∈Closed, and (2)
s′ ∈Succ(a,s). Notice that this correspond to the product ofAe with
the graph that contains all triples present in any of the documents
that have been retrieved so far in our computation. Te following is
an optimality result both for BFS and A* run with our property-path
heuristic.
Theorem 4.1. Let GA* be deﬁned as above from a run of A* that
has returned N answers with either h = hAe or h = 0. Let πk be
path found to the k-th solution found by A*, for any k ∈{1, . . . , N }.

Evaluating navigational RDF queries over the Web
, ,
Furthermore, let ck be the length of the k-th shortest path from sstart
to any goal state over GA*. Ten the cost of πk is ck.
sketch. Let Gi
A* denote GA* right afer the i-th solution has
been returned. We prove by induction that the i-th solution found
by A* would be the ﬁrst solution found by A* if we were to mark
as non-goals all solutions found prior to the i-th solution. Now we
use the fact that the heuristic is admissible and thus the solution
found is the i-th optimal over Gi
A*.
□
In practice, as we see later on, BFS runs slower than A* with our
heuristic. Interestingly, we can prove that A* is beter in the sense
that BFS has to expand at least as many nodes as A*.
Theorem 4.2. Let (u,e) be an IRI and a property path. Ten every
node expanded by A*, used with hAe , is also expanded by BFS.
Proof. We observe that hAe (s) > 0 for every non-goal state s.
Te result now follows from Teorem 7 in [31].
□
5
OPTIMISING QUERY EXECUTION
In this section we provide several optimisations to the base algo-
rithms presented in Section 3 and Section 4. We start by describing
how parallel expansions can be used in order to reduce the execu-
tion times of our search algorithms. We then explain what are the
current shortcomings of the Linked Data infrastructure and pro-
pose a way to overcome them using endpoints. Finally, we discuss
a way of tweaking the heuristic used in A* in order to both avoid
unnecessary network requests and ﬁnd answers sooner.
5.1
Parallel Expansions
All of our search algorithms function in such a way that they select
a set of nodes which will serve as the starting point in the next
iteration, and then start the search from these nodes one by one.
An issue with this is that a request over the network—which on
average takes more than a second— is needed per each dereference.
Instead of expanding one node at a time, our algorithms can
beneﬁt greatly from expanding multiple ones in parallel. More
speciﬁcally, we modify the algorithm to extract up to k of nodes that
could be at the top of the Open, and expand them in parallel. k is now
a paramenter of the algorithms which can be understood as a degree
of parallelism. To obtain k-BFS and k-DFS, we modify Algorithm 1
such that Line 16 deals with up to k top-valued nodes from Open,
and neighbours are computed for them in paralell. Similarly, k-A* is
obtained by extracting up to k nodes with the highest f -values from
Open in Line 8 of Algorithm 2, and expanding them all in parallel
in line 11. In all 3 algorithms, afer all successors are computed, we
add them all together to Open, in the same order that we would
have, had the nodes been expanded sequentially. It is then not hard
to see that optimality (Teorem 4.1) still holds for k-A* (and k-BFS).
In Section 6 we show that, depending on the degree of parallelism,
the computation is sped up tenfold in some instances.
5.2
Using Te Endpoint Infrastructure
Te evaluation algorithms presented in previous sections rely on
the dereferencing mechanism of Linked Data and work under the
assumption that when a speciﬁc IRI is dereferenced, we obtain
all the triples mentioning such an IRI which reside on the server
we are using. Unfortunately, it was shown repeatedly that this is
generally not the case when working with Linked Data [22, 23],
which can lead to incomplete answers since many triples containing
the dereferenced IRI might not be returned. Tis is particularly
problematic when working with inverse links, as it is estimated
that publishers include only about a half of the triples where the
requested IRI appears as the object [23].
Many Linked Data providers also set up public SPARQL end-
points where users can query the dataset, so we can partially alle-
viate the lack of Linked Data infrastructure by relying on public
SPARQL endpoints together with Linked Data. When evaluating
property paths over Linked Data, we combine the two approaches
and, each time we dereference an IRI, we also query the appropri-
ate endpoint in order to obtain the triples mentioning the said IRI.
Furthermore, we query the endpoint only asking for links in the
appropriate direction. For instance, if our property paths needs
to traverse the author edge forwards starting from an IRI start,
we ask the query SELECT ?x WHERE {start author ?x} to the
appropriate endpoint and similarly for the backwards edges.
5.3
Minimising Network Requests
We have argued above that dereferencing is an expensive operation.
When A* is modiﬁed to ﬁnd multiple answers, as we proposed above
(i.e., by simply adding solutions to a list), some expansions may be
carried out sooner than we would want, leading to unnecessary
dereferencing. Indeed, our heuristic assigns the value 0 to any node
of the form (u,qf ) with qf a ﬁnal state (because the distance to a
ﬁnal state is 0). Assuming qf has outgoing transitions, the standard
A* algorithm would prioritise the expansions of those nodes over
any other node with the same f value, an operation that intuitively
would take us farther from the goal.
We can postpone these expansions by using a slightly diﬀerent
heuristic, deﬁned as follows. Let A = (Q, Σ,qo, F,δ) be an NFA.
Te pathmax distance ˆd(q,q′) between two states is deﬁned as
ˆd(q,q′) = 1 + minq |δ(q,a) is deﬁned d(q,q′), if δ(q,a) is deﬁned for
at least some a ∈Σ, or ˆd(q,q′) = ∞otherwise; and where d is the
usual graph distance between q and q′. Ten the pathmax heuristic
ˆhA with respect to A is deﬁned as ˆhA((u,q)) = minqf ∈F ˆd(q,qf ),
that is, the minimum pathmax distance from q to any ﬁnal state of
A. Tis is a standard technique used by search algorithms in which
a node may have to be re-expanded [25, 33]. Interestingly, one can
see that the pathmax distance ˆd coincides with the usual distance
in all states of the automata except for the ﬁnal states. We avoid
early re-expansion of nodes with ﬁnal states because the heuristic
for them now corresponds to 1 plus the minimum of the heuristic
value of the neighbours of this state.
6
EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
In this section we evaluate how an implementation of A* algorithm
performs when executing property path queries over a real Web
environment. To establish a baseline, we also compare the perfor-
mance of A* with BFS and DFS, the only other algorithms proposed
so far in the literature. We begin by presenting our experimental
setup, the queries, and then compare how A* fares against BFS and
DFS, showing that A* outperforms the other two algorithms on a
regular basis. Next we investigate the impact of parallel requests on

, ,
Jorge Baier, Dietrich Daroch, Juan L. Reuter, Domagoj Vrgoˇc
0
100
200
300
400
500
Requests
0
50
100
150
200
250
Answers
q_Coauthor
A*
DFS
BFS
0
50
100
150
200
250
Requests
0
50
100
150
200
Answers
q_NATO
A*
DFS
BFS
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Requests
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Answers
q_Bacon
A*
DFS
BFS
Figure 2: A* minimises the requests needed to obtain answers of q Coauthor, q NATO and q Bacon
our algorithms. As we see, adding parallelism reduces total runtime
for all three algorithms, with A* remaining the most consistent. In-
terestingly, all algorithms tend to look more alike as more and more
parallel requests are allowed. Finally, we discuss some real-world
examples of the paths retrieved by our algorithms.
6.1
Experimental Setup
We selected 11 navigational queries that are inspired by previous
benchmarks (see e.g. [14, 32]). Tese queries are representative
of several diﬀerent features of property paths, ranging from easy,
ﬁxed-depth ones to queries using multiple star operations which
are much harder to evaluate. Our queries target one or more of
the following Linked Data domains: YAGO, a huge knowledge
base extracting data from Wikipedia and various other sources [29];
DBPedia [6], one of the central datasets of the Linked Data initiative
that also originates from Wikipedia; Linked Movie Database, the
best known semantic database for movie information [27]; and the
Linked Data domain of DBLP. Our implementations will always use
the optimisation techniques presented in Section 5.2 and Section 5.3,
while we assess the beneﬁts of parallelism (Section 5.1) separately.
As an example, below are 3 of the 11 queries we use. For complete
details of the queries, results of all our runs, and implementation
of our algorithms, please refer to our online appendix [1].
q Coauthor: Te property path (coauthor−· coauthor)∗in the
DBLP dataset, starting from the IRI of M. Stonebraker. Tis property
path looks for the IRI of all authors that are related to M. Stonebraker
on DBLP, by a co-authorship path of arbitrary length.
q NATO: A property path that selects all places that host an entity
dealing with a NATO member state, according to YAGO.
q Bacon: A property path that looks for the IRIs of actors having
a ﬁnite Bacon-number1, and that navigates using links and/or IRIs
present in any of YAGO, DBPedia or Linked Movie Database. Tis
is an interesting query, as currently the only way to evaluate it is
by means of our Linked Data approach (see [8] for a discussion).
To assess our algorithm we use two indicators: the number of
HTTP requests made to compute a fraction of the answers, and the
time needed to compute them. In both cases we want to minimise
the number of requests, or the amount of time needed to produce
the answers. We note that the number of requests is a much beter
indicator on how the algorithm works: because HTTP requests
take considerably more time than all the other operations, the total
1An actress has Bacon number 1 if she acted in the same movie as Kevin Bacon, and
Bacon number n if she acted with someone with Bacon number n −1.
time of computing our queries is essentially given by the number
of requests performed by the algorithm. Tis also rules out the
dependence on parameters which we have no control over, such as
the Internet traﬃc, or the availability of servers providing us with
data. Tus, by focusing on requests we ignore latency diﬀerences
that may persist even afer taking several runs of the same query.
All experiments were run without an access to the data locally,
relying solely on the Web infrastructure to retrieve the data needed
at each step of the computation. Te experiments were run on a
Manjaro Linux machine with a i5-4670 quad-core processor and
4GB of RAM. To avoid ﬂooding servers with requests we only ran
our search until we either found 1 000 answers, retrieved more
than 100 000 triples from the server, or reached a 10-minute time
limit. Each experiment was ran 10 times, and since the results were
largely equivalent, we report the numbers of the latest execution.
Te source code for running the experiments is available at [1].
6.2
Heuristic Search Against BFS and DFS
Te general conclusion of our experiments is that A* both requires
fewer requests and is faster than BFS and DFS. Before reporting
our results in full, let us examine the runs of queries q Coauthor,
q Bacon and q NATO presented above. Figure 2 shows the num-
ber of requests needed to compute a fraction of the total answers
available for these queries. In particular, we see that both A* and
DFS are the best choice for the query q Coauthor, because they
produce more answers using fewer HTTP requests (even though
the quality of the answers produced by A* is arguably beter – see
below). On the other hand, BFS requires around 300 expansions to
start producing answers, which results in a much slower through-
put altogether. Next, both A* and BFS are the best choice for the
query q NATO. Tis is again expected, because this query requires
less navigation and more shallow exploration. It is interesting to
see that in this case A* really simulates the optimal BFS search. On
the other hand, DFS wastes a lot of time exploring long paths and
obtaining “deep” answers. Finally, in the case of q Bacon, A* is
shown to strictly beat both BFS and DFS. In the case of BFS, this is
mostly because A*’s heuristic allows a ﬁner control on which links
to explore, and the main detractor for DFS is that it starts exploring
initial links which ofen require many requests before encountering
a solution.
Full results. For reasons of space, we cannot report the remaining
8 experiments with the same detail, so instead we do the following.
For each query, we analyse the complete behaviour of the answers

Evaluating navigational RDF queries over the Web
, ,
vs. request and answers vs. time curves. We say that an algorithm
dominates the others if it is such that it returns at least as many
answers as any other for 80% of the range of requests (or time)
for which we evaluate them. For example, in Figure 2 we see that
A∗dominates the other algorithms for queries q Coauthor and
q Bacon, while in the case of q NATO both A∗and BFS dominate.
Te total number of times each algorithm dominates (out of 11
queries) is shown below, for both the answers vs. request and an-
swers vs. time curves (full details are found in our online appendix
[1]). Once again, A∗remains the most consistent option.
Measure
A*
BFS
DFS
Requests v/s Answers
11
3
4
Time v/s Answers
11
3
4
6.3
Te Eﬀect of Parallel Requests
Next, we test the eﬀect of allowing parallel requests in our algo-
rithms, as presented in Section 5.1. Tis optimisation goes a long
way into tackling the slow latency of Web requests, one of the
main problems of querying over the HTTP protocol. Indeed, HTTP
requests are such an important botleneck in our algorithm that
allowing parallel requests essentially means parallelising the entire
algorithm. Issuing parallel requests also sofen up high latency
pockets or temporary network problems. Moreover, we can also
expect the algorithms to be accelerated even further when the num-
ber of allowed requests is increased, simply because more requests
essentially means more parallel instances of our algorithm and even
more sofening power. Te other interesting observation is that, as
we allow more parallel requests in our algorithms, all of A*, BFS
and DFS start to look alike, and in fact it is easy to see that all three
algorithms are essentially equivalent in the limit where we issue
an inﬁnite number of requests at the same time.
To empirically test these observations, we issued new live runs
of the 11 queries described in the previous sections, but this time
using parallel versions of A*, BFS and DFS. To see the impact on the
number of parallel threads allowed, we report experiments with
a maximum of 10, 20, and 40 parallel threads. Before reporting
the full results, let us start with comparing the results of the algo-
rithm with no parallelism against the one with 20 parallel threads.
Figure 3 shows the time needed to compute the answers of query
q Coauthor, for all three algorithms on their non-parallel version
and on their parallel version with a maximum of 20 threads. As
we see, the time needed to compute the same amount of answers
decreases by almost tenfold in all three cases. Moreover, the parallel
version of BFS now behaves almost as A* and DFS when computing
the ﬁrst 300 answers (it then reaches a stalemate because all shallow
answers have already been discovered).
Full results. As expected, the time taken to compute answers
decreases drastically (the behaviour is the same as for q Coauthor).
Perhaps more interestingly, we focus on how algorithms change
when more parallel threads are allowed. In order to do this, we
repeat the same reports made in the previous subsection, but this
time for diﬀerent levels of parallelism. More precisely, for each of
our 11 queries and 4 diﬀerent thread counts we report which of A*,
BFS or DFS dominates in the time needed to compute the answers.
As we see as more parallelism is allowed into the algorithms, both
BFS and DFS start becoming more competitive compared to A*.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Time (s)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Answers
q_Coauthor
A*
A*-20p
BFS
BFS-20p
DFS
DFS-20p
Figure 3: Answers over time on q Coauthor. Te parallel
versions (in red) are much faster than the non-parallel ones.
dblpAuthor:Michael_Stonebraker
ˆdc:creator
dblpPub:conf/acm/MuthuswamyKZSPJ85
dc:creator
dblpAuthor:Matthias_Jarke
rdfs:label
"Matthias Jarke"
dblpAuthor:Michael_Stonebraker
ˆdc:creator
dblpPub:conf/dbvis/AikenCLSSW95
dc:creator
dblpAuthor:Mybrid_Spalding
rdfs:label
"Mybrid Spalding"
dblpAuthor:Michael_Stonebraker
ˆdc:creator
dblpPub:conf/vldb/StonebrakerABCCFLLMOORTZ05
dc:creator
dblpAuthors:Adam_Batkin
rdfs:label
"Adam Batkin"
Figure 4: Paths for the 10th, 50th, and 200th answers found
by A* on q Coauthor.
Max parallel calls
A*
BFS
DFS
1
11
3
4
10
7
3
3
20
7
3
3
40
6
4
5
6.4
Returning paths
So far we have only talked about ﬁnding pairs of nodes that form
the answer of a property path query, as dictated by the SPARQL
standard. However, our search algorithms can also be used to
compute the entire path between two nodes, and in fact we can get
them at a very marginal cost: we already need to keep track of all
the expansions, so we can produce paths simply by returning the
IRIs corresponding to each of the requests made by our algorithm.
Paths can be used as a justiﬁcation for the answers, or to con-
tinue extracting more information aferwards. In the case of queries
over Linked Data, we can even use the paths of queries to gather
information about the structure of the Web itself. For these rea-
sons returning paths is a very sought-afer functionality of graph
query languages, and is present for example in the popular Neo4j
engine [34]. Unfortunately, a language capable of returning (all)
paths, or even (all) simple paths, is bound to be very complicated to
evaluate [5, 28], and this is the reason why the SPARQL standard
does not include such a functionality. In our case we have a natural
workaround for this issue, as our search focuses on shortest paths,
which are known to be easier to evaluate than simple paths.
As an example of the usefulness of paths, it was by analysing
paths that we inferred that A* normally produces beter answers
than DFS (because the paths are shorter). As an illustration, Figure 4

, ,
Jorge Baier, Dietrich Daroch, Juan L. Reuter, Domagoj Vrgoˇc
presents paths witnessing the answers 10, 50, and 200 of a run of the
query q Coauthor with A*. From the query itself all that we can
say is that these three researchers are connected to M. Stonebraker
by a coauthorship path of arbitrary length. However, by looking
at the paths we now know that they are direct coauthors. On the
other hand, the length of paths retrieved by DFS are going to be
much higher. For one run of q Coauthor with DFS the lengths of
the answers 10, 50 and 200 were respectively 14, 74, 312.
7
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Tis paper presents the ﬁrst fundamental study of the problem of
computing property paths over the Web. We showed how to cast
query answering as an AI search problem, and provided an optimal
algorithm based on the classical A* algorithm. We provide strong
theoretical and practical evidence that A* is a beter alternative
than both BFS and DFS in the context of Linked Data, and this can
be sped up even further by allowing parallel execution threads.
In terms of future work, we identify three main challenges we
plan on tackling.
Using triple pattern fragments. As noted in Section 5, there
are some issues with the Linked Data infrastructure; most notably,
it does not provide all the information one would expect when
dereferencing IRIs. While it is possible to alleviate this issue by
using endpoints, since their uptime can be erratic, it was recently
suggested that a more lightweight infrastructure of triple patern
fragments [36] would be more appropriate for the task. In the
future we plan to test how using triple patern fragments aﬀects
the performance and accuracy of our algorithms when compared
to the standard endpoint infrastructure.
Answering NautiLOD and LDQL queries with A*. NautiLOD
[13] is a traversal-based language proposed as an option to SPARLQ
when querying Linked Data, in which one has more ﬁner control
on how is the Web going to be traversed. In the same spirit, LDQL
[20] is another language aimed at controlling how data is to be
retrieved, albeit much less powerful than NautiLOD. Te interesting
observation is that we can also cast the query evaluation problem
for these languages as a search problem, and thus A* should also
provide optimal query answering algorithms. In fact, the algorithm
proposed in [13] is essentially what we deﬁne here as k-DFS, so one
can naturally suspect that A* should provide a beter behaviour.
A* in local computations. Although we based our investigation
in the context of Linked Data, there is some evidence that our ap-
proach might have potential in the classical seting where data is
available locally. Te main reason is the fact that the currently
available property path evaluation algorithms demand a lot of re-
sources, especially when dealing with property paths that use the
Kleene star operator, and current systems cannot easily cope with
these requirements [8]. On the other hand, we have seen that the
memory usage of an A*-based algorithm is directly dependant on
the amount of answers that need to be computed, and each answer
requires an almost negligible amount of additional memory. Tis
suggests that, in those cases when we do not need all the answers,
an approach based on A* might be a beter option.
