ﬁntech-kMC: Agent based simulations of ﬁnancial platforms for design and testing
of machine learning systems
Isaac Tamblyn,1,2,3 Tengkai Yu, 1,4 Ian Benlolo 1,3
1 Cash App, Block, Toronto, ON M5A 1J7, Canada
2 Vector Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Toronto, ON M5G 1M1, Canada
3 Department of Physics, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1N 6N5, Canada
4 Department of Computer Science, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC V8P 5C2, Canada

Abstract
We discuss our simulation tool, ﬁntech-kMC, which is de-
signed to generate synthetic data for machine learning model
development and testing. ﬁntech-kMC is an agent-based
model driven by a kinetic Monte Carlo (a.k.a. continuous time
Monte Carlo) engine which simulates the behaviour of cus-
tomers using an online digital ﬁnancial platform. The tool
provides an interpretable, reproducible, and realistic way of
generating synthetic data which can be used to validate and
test AI/ML models and pipelines to be used in real-world
customer-facing ﬁnancial applications.
To appear at AAAI-23 Bridge Program: AI for Financial
Services, Washington D.C., February 7 – 8, 2023
Introduction
Simulated data is useful in machine learning (ML) work
for developing and testing algorithms in a repeatable and
veriﬁable way. We note that although historically there
has been some debate about the utility of simulated data
in machine learning applications given the challenges of
sim2real (H¨ofer et al. 2020), irrespective of whether sim-
ulated data is valuable for training production models, they
are extremely valuable in the initial stages of model design,
unit testing, and veriﬁcation processes. Because it is possible
to have absolute certainty regarding ground truth labels as
well as microscopic control over their data generation con-
ditions, it is possible to remove the initial complexity and
variability of noisy, real-world data, enabling a clean de-
velopment environment to verify the functioning and logic
of machine learning pipelines and models. Simulations are
particularly valuable when the system under study is charac-
terized by large class imbalances, rare events, and signiﬁcant
label noise. All of these challenging modelling problems fre-
quently appear in ﬁntech machine learning.
This article is organized as follows. We brieﬂy describe
possible approaches to synthetic dataset generation. We then
describe the kinetic Monte Carlo (kMC) algorithm in a gen-
eral way. Next, we explain attributes that deﬁne agents in
fintech-kMC, followed by a discussion related to the
treatment of the rate constants which govern their behaviour.
We provide examples of our simulation output, as well as
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
some simple supervised machine learning tests which make
use of this output. We discuss the limitations of our method,
and ﬁnally, conclude. Our major contributions are:
• a new agent-based simulation tool, driven by kinetic
Monte Carlo is introduced
• a detailed description of the tool is provided, including
its design, modelling capabilities, and output format
• demonstration of a predictive model trained to detect
“bad actors” is given as a prototypical example of an ML
model that uses our synthetic data
Different types of synthetic data generation protocols ex-
ist. They include simple heuristics (e.g. if an input feature
takes some value X, set the output to label Y ), simula-
tions which can be deterministic (Papageorgiou and Paskov
1999) or stochastic (Wang 2012), and generative mod-
els (Goodfellow et al. 2014; Albergo, Kanwar, and Shanahan
2019) which have been trained from sample data streams
from the true system. We believe that generative models,
while they may be able to best mimic a real-world dataset,
introduce an entirely new set of issues since they themselves
have dependencies on high-quality data pipelines, training
infrastructure, monitoring, etc. A stochastic simulation is an
excellent balance between being realistic enough to ﬁnd im-
plementation bugs in machine learning workﬂows yet sim-
ple enough not to introduce them.
kinetic Monte Carlo (kMC)
kMC has a long history of use in the physical sciences for
describing the microscopic time evolution of a wide range of
systems, such as molecules on catalytic surfaces (Stamatakis
and Vlachos 2012), self-assembly and growth (Ghosh et al.
2021), and radiation damage (Voter 2007). The method has
also been successfully applied to the social sciences, where
it has been used to simulate the structure and informa-
tion ﬂow through large online social graphs such as Twit-
ter (Ryczko et al. 2017).
Unlike some other Monte Carlo based simulation tech-
niques (most notably Markov Chain Monte Carlo, MCMC),
kMC is a rejection-free algorithm. An event occurs at ev-
ery simulation step. Additionally, we note that the simu-
lation step size, ∆t, is not ﬁxed. In a hypothetical system
with only a single type of event, occurring at one charac-
teristic rate, r, each step in simulation time will be approxi-
arXiv:2301.01807v1  [cs.LG]  4 Jan 2023

Algorithm 1: kinetic Monte Carlo algorithm
Parameters: num agents, maximum time, etc
Output: logﬁle
1: while simulation time < maximum time do
2:
update rates()
3:
rates := [r1, r2, ..., rn] {array of rates for n events}
4:
cummulative array = cumsum(rates/sum(rates))
5:
u1 := rand() {Get random number u1 ∈(0, 1]}
6:
event := binary search(cummulative array, u1)
7:
carry out event(event)
8:
u2 := rand() {Get random number u2 ∈(0, 1], up-
date simulation time}
9:
simulation time := simulation time −ln(u2)/R
10:
write out event information to logﬁle
11: end while
mately ∆t = r−1 apart. In a simulation with many possible
events (and rates), the simulation will progress forward in
time according to the total effective rate of the system (e.g.
R−1 = r−1
1
+ r−1
2
+ ...). In practice, this means that as
the total number of possible events grows, the time between
each successive one decreases. This is exactly what happens
in a real-world system. Consider an early-stage ﬁnancial
platform with exactly 1 customer. If that customer deposits
money once per week, then after 1 month the transaction log
will contain approximately 4 entries, spaced roughly 1 week
apart. If the number of customers increases by x100 (and
the timing of their deposities is randomly distributed) then
after the same period of one month, we would expect 400
entries, with the average time between updates decreasing
by x100. kMC simulations mimic this behaviour, and allow
for irregularly spaced events and changing values of ∆t as
the simulation progresses.
We note that in the above example, we assumed that the
rates of client deposits were uncorrelated with each other
and occurred at random times. In general this of course is
not guaranteed to be true, particularly with payments which
are associated with customer paycheques, rent, loan repay-
ments, etc, which tend to occur around speciﬁc times of the
month or the year. See Sec. Dynamic rates for further dis-
cussion on how we account for this..
Disclaimer: in the following discussion, for pedagogical
purposes, we give examples of actions or rules which might
take place on a ﬁntech platform. These are purely hypothet-
ical, and are not intended to describe a recommended set of
policies of a real ﬁntech platform. Such platforms are sub-
ject to a large number of policies and regulations (partic-
ularly with respect to ID requirements, customer age limits,
etc). While fintech-kMC could be adapted to incorporate
those speciﬁc requirements as needed, for this discussion we
do not handle this complexity or region-speciﬁc limitations.
Agents
Within fintech-kMC, customers are represented as
agents. Currently, we have 2 distinct types of agents which
are included within our model:
• Individual customers: These are the most common type
of agent in typical simulations and represent individual
customers. Within this type, several different archetypes
exist (see Sec. Agent Archetypes).
• Businesses: Representing organizations or businesses,
these agents engage in a restricted set of actions (e.g. they
do not pay rent, repay loan, or buy btc). See
Sec. Available actions for further discussion of agent ac-
tions. Currently we have only a single archetype here.
Individual or business accounts can also be “bad actors”
(e.g. engaged in credit card fraud, consumer scams, etc).
Actions taken by these agents are primarily associated with
positive labels. Subtle behavioural differences between such
agents and regular, healthy, customers are what allow ML
algorithms to make predictions.
Static, Dynamical, and Triggered Rates
fintech-kMC allows for the concurrent use of both static
rates and dynamical rates. An example of a static rate could
be the rate at which new customers join the platform. For the
timescales we typically consider, this rate can be assumed to
be constant. Conversely, dynamical rates can change over
the course of the simulation. Some dynamical rates can
change continuously, while others are activated according to
a pre-established set of rules or when a particular simulation
state has been reached (e.g. an agent successfully has their
ID veriﬁed).
Dynamic rates Dynamical rate schedules can be based
on time (e.g. the absolute simulated world-clock time, or a
relative time, such as how many days a customer has been
been a user of the platform). Regular events such as pay-
cheque deposits are also included in this manner. For sched-
uled events such as paycheques, rent, etc, we set the rates of
all affected agents to a very high value on days correspond-
ing to such payments (e.g. 1st day of the month). This means
the probability such an event will be selected is signiﬁcantly
higher than any other process. As soon as the event occurs,
we reset this rate to 0. Using this approach, it is possible to
naturally incorporate such “guaranteed events” into the kMC
approach.
Other rules which govern dynamical rates can be based
on the current state of the agent. For example, an agent
may purchase bitcoin (BTC) at a frequency of ≈1/week,
provided their account balance is above a threshold and
they have passed the id veriﬁcation process. Similarly, an
agent may make a monthly loan payment via a peer-to-
peer (p2p send) payment until the balance is 0. Allowing
for dynamic and ﬂexible modiﬁcations to the rate constants
which determine agent behaviour allows for a realistic ap-
proach to modelling human behaviour.
Available actions Agents interact with one another and
evolve through time via the actions they take within the sim-
ulation. Many such actions exist.
• cash in: money is moved into the account. The range
of possible transfer amounts depends on whether or not
the agent has completed id verification.
• cash out: money is removed from the account. The
range of possible transfer amounts depends on whether
or not the agent has completed id verification.

• p2p send: money is removed from the account and is
transferred to another agent via a peer-to-peer payment.
• id verification: successful veriﬁcation of an
agent “unlocks” other actions (speciﬁcally btc buy)
and changes the maximum allowed cash in and
cash out amounts. A customer will attempt to do this
action until they are successful, with bad actors having a
lower probability of success.
• btc buy: after an agent has successfully verﬁed their
ID via the id verification action, they can pur-
chase BTC. This action reduces their cash balance and
increases their BTC balance.
• pay rent: if an agent pays rent, it will do so at a fre-
quency of once every 30 days.
• deposit paycheque: if an agent receives a pay-
cheque, it will be deposited into their account once every
14 days.
• repay loan: loan repayments occur on a 7 day cycle
(at a ﬁxed percentage of the original amount) until the
balance of the loan is zero.
We note that any actions involving money movements
above can only occur if there is sufﬁcient balance to do so
(accounts cannot go negative).
Importantly, to represent the diversity of customer be-
haviour observed on ﬁntech platforms by real customers, the
individual rates each agent operates with are not identical,
but rather are sampled randomly from a statistical distribu-
tion. We also use the concept of agent archetypes.
Agent Archetypes
While no two people are the same, in
modelling and business analytics it is often useful to invoke
the concept of customer archetypes. By understanding the
behaviours and motivations of customers on our platform,
we can segment them into groups which have similar actions
and (likely) motivations. Within fintech-kMC, we make
use of this idea by deﬁning different agent archetypes which
give rise to distinct behaviours.
For
example,
an
agent
archetype
of
a
cypto enthusiast
will
be
assigned
a
rate
for
BTC purchases from the normal distribution N(µ, σ),
where µ = 2 and σ = 1 (in units of days−1), whereas a
crypto skeptic would have that rate set to zero. The
speciﬁc values of µ and σ are adjustable input parameters
that the modeller can use to best mimic the details of the
particular ﬁntech platform they wish to simulate. Similarly,
a customer that is a big spender may have an average
cash in amount which is signiﬁcantly larger than their
peers. Deﬁning the agent archetype determines the distri-
bution of rates and the typical range of money movement
values an agent will use during the simulation. This allows
for the creation of a meaningful diversity of agents within
the dataset. Agents which belong to the same archetype will
not have identical behaviours, but rather their preferences
and propensities will be sampled from the same statistical
distributions.
Output
fintech-kMC provides simulation output in the form
of structured ﬁles which should be familiar to practi-
tioners working in the area of datascience and machine
learning. They are CSV ﬁles consisting of timestamped
records of all events and include information about the
generating agent, the action that was taken, and any
value associated with it. For example, when an agent
has their ID veriﬁed, the following information is re-
ported: time, initiating token, action, value. For example,
this
may
appear
as
2022-09-03 04:50:05.00,
C 83dhpqzz, id verification, True.
A
p2p
currency exchange includes an addtional ﬁeld corresponding
to the receiving token. For example: 2022-11-14
04:50:05.00, C b6589f, p2p sent, 2000,
C 83dhpqzz.
Here initiating token is a hash of the agent’s
unique numerical ID. Typically such tokens are used in real-
world systems to uniquely speciﬁc customers without re-
vealing any personally identifying information (PII) data.
We use this formatting style to mimic the type of data one
would ﬁnd in raw log ﬁles from a real-world system as
closely as possible. In a similar spirit, we note that a ﬁnal
dataframe has NULL values that must be accounted for (a
common occurrence in realistic datasets) because different
events can have different numbers of attributes. We inten-
tionally provide the output data in this format where actions
and agents are intermixed so that preprocessing steps used
in the ML pipeline can also be validated and tested.
Testing machine learning models
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Recall
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Precision
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
False Positive Rate
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
True Positive Rate
ROC curve (area = 0.988)
4
2
0
2
4
SHAP value (impact on model output)
time_diff_std_cash_in
time_diff_median_cash_in
time_diff_median_btc_buy
time_diff_median_all
cash_in_value
p2p_sent_ratio
btc_buy_count
time_diff_median_p2p_sent
cash_in_ratio
time_diff_std_all
cash_out_ratio
time_diff_mean_cash_out
cash_out_value
btc_buy_value
time_diff_median_cash_out
time_diff_mean_all
customer_verification_ratio
btc_buy_value_ratio
p2p_sent_value_ratio
cash_out_value_ratio
Low
High
Feature value
Figure 1: a) Precision-Recall and Receiver operating charac-
teristic, ROC (inset) and b) SHAP (Lundberg and Lee 2017)
analysis for our simple example binary classiﬁer model.
Model training and validation data were generated using the
fintech-kMC tool. The full list of features used to train
the model is listed in the online Supplementary Information.
To demonstrate the utility of fintech-kMC with ML
tools, here we show results from a toy experiment to de-
tect and classify bad actors from regular customers. For this
particular simulation, bad actors were conﬁgured to have
a lower rate of ID veriﬁcation success (50% compared to
75% for regular customers) and slightly different peer-to-
peer money transfer behaviours (an average transfer amount
of 5±3 vs 8±3 and a willingness to do such transfers only
when their balance was above 15±3 vs 30±3). Here ± de-
notes the standard deviation of the normal distributions from
which we sample to determine the speciﬁc transfer amounts.

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
epoch
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
log(loss)
train
val
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Recall
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Precision
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
False Positive Rate
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
True Positive Rate
ROC curve (area = 0.965)
Figure 2: a) LSTM loss curves for train and validation sets b)
Precision-Recall and ROC (inset) for the model (evaluated
at epoch denoted by vertical red line). Hyperparameters are
listed in the online Supplementary Information.
We created a population of 1000 agents where 50% were bad
actors and the remaining were regular, healthy customers.
Our simulation covered a time period of ≈8 days, which,
given the various rate constants we used, represents approx-
imately 100 actions for each agent. We use the convention
that a positive label is deleterious (e.g. a scam, an account
take-over, or some other activity we wish to identify and pre-
vent). To train a model, we constructed a series of features
listed in the online Supplementary Information. We used a
train-validation-test split of 80%-10%-10% and trained an
XGBoost binary classiﬁer (Chen and Guestrin 2016), Fig. 1,
as well as an LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997),
Fig. 2, on the data (full model training hyperparameters are
provided in the online Supplementary Information).
Limitations of the method
• Introducing new types of actions requires more soft-
ware implementation. We cannot learn directly from data
streams from our real-world system.
• Rate constant probability distributions in the control ﬁle
are set manually by the user. To match them to a partic-
ular dataset, they must be optimized in a separate loop.
Conceivably this could be achieved by automatic differ-
entiation, but such capability is not currently included.
• Large scale network effects are currently not well de-
scribed due to the small number of agents we typically
simulate using the tool (e.g. 1k). In principle, agent-based
kMC can be used to simulate larger “worlds” (e.g. 1-
10M) but for simplicity we have not implemented the
typical optimization or parallelization techniques needed
to achieve such performance here.
• The current implementation is written in python. This is
convenient for prototyping and adding new features, but
results in a tool which is not as performant as it could be.
• In the current implementation, actions can occur at any
time during the simulated day, whereas in real-world data
customers tend to exhibit daily trends. This is not, how-
ever, a fundamental limitation of the methodology.
• Our positive labels are currently assigned at the customer
level, rather than the individual transaction level. We are
currently working to remove this restriction.
• Data produced by the model should not be seen as a
source of data for production models.
Conclusions
fintech-kMC is an agent-based model which can sim-
ulate the behaviour of customers of online digital ﬁnan-
cial platforms. The tool implements many actions typical of
such platforms, such as peer-to-peer money movements, ID
veriﬁcation, and crypto purchases. By using kinetic Monte
Carlo, events occur at realistic timescales and can have
meaningful sequential dependencies. Data produced by the
tool can be used to test and validate machine learning work-
ﬂows in a controllable and repeatable way.
