arXiv:1901.05437v1  [cs.AI]  16 Jan 2019
Soft Constraints for Inference with Declarative Knowledge
Zenna Tavares 1 Javier Burroni 2 Edgar Minaysan 3 Armando Solar Lezama 1 Rajesh Rangananth 4
Abstract
We develop a likelihood free inference procedure
for conditioning a probabilistic model on a pred-
icate. A predicate is a Boolean valued function
which expresses a yes/no question about a do-
main.
Our contribution, which we call predi-
cate exchange, constructs a softened predicate
which takes value in the unit interval [0, 1] as
opposed to a simply true or false.
Intuitively,
1 corresponds to true, and a high value (such
as 0.999) corresponds to “nearly true” as deter-
mined by a distance metric. We deﬁne Boolean
algebra for soft predicates, such that they can be
negated, conjoined and disjoined arbitrarily. A
softened predicate can serve as a tractable proxy
to a likelihood function for approximate poste-
rior inference.
However, to target exact infer-
ence, we temper the relaxation by a tempera-
ture parameter, and add a accept/reject phase use
to replica exchange Markov Chain Mont Carlo,
which exchanges states between a sequence of
models conditioned on predicates at varying tem-
peratures. We describe a lightweight implemen-
tation of predicate exchange that it provides a lan-
guage independent layer that can be implemented
on top of existingn modeling formalisms.
1. Introduction
Conditioning in Bayesian inference incorporates observed
data into a model. In a broader sense, conditioning revises a
model such that a yes/no question (a predicate) is resolved
to a true proposition (a fact). For instance, the question of
whether a variable is equal to a particular value, changes
from a predicate of uncertain truth, to a fact, once it is ob-
served. In principle, a predicate can be used to declare any
fact about a domain, not only the observation of data. In
*Equal contribution
1MIT, USA
2UMass Amherst, USA
3Princeton University, USA 4NYU, USA. Correspondence to:

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).
practice, sampling from models conditioned on most pred-
icates presents severe challenges to existing inference pro-
cedures.
Predicates can be used to update a model to adhere to
known facts about a domain, without the burden of specify-
ing how to revise the model. For example, in inverse graph-
ics (Marschner & Greenberg, 1998; Kulkarni et al., 2015)
(inferring three dimensional geometry from observed im-
ages), the proposition “rigid bodies do not intersect” is a
predicate on latent conﬁgurations of geometry. To manu-
ally revise a model to constructively adhere to this fact is
ranges between inconvenient and infeasible. Instead, we
would ideally simply condition on it being true, concen-
trating probability mass on physically plausible geometric
conﬁgurations, ultimately to yield more accurate posterior
inferences in the inverse graphics problem.
Predicates can also express observations that are more ab-
stract than variables in a model. In diabetes research for ex-
ample, probabilistic models have been used to relate phys-
iological factors to glucose levels over time (Levine et al.,
2017; Murata et al., 2004). Rather than concrete, numeri-
cal glucose measurements, a medical practitioner may ob-
serve (or be told) that a patient suffers from recurrent hy-
poglycemia, i.e., that their glucose levels periodically fall
below a critical value.
Even if the occurrence of hypo-
glycemia does not appear as an explicit variable in the
model, it could be constructed as a predicate on glucose
levels, and conditioned on to infer the posterior distribution
over latent physiological factors.
Several effective sampling (Andrieu et al., 2003) and vari-
ational (Jordan et al., 1999; Ranganath et al., 2014) ap-
proaches to inference require only a black-box likelihood
function, i.e., one evaluable on arbitrary input. The likeli-
hood function quantiﬁes the extent to which values of la-
tent variables are consistent with observations. However,
most models conditioned on most predicates have likeli-
hood functions that are intractable to compute or unknown.
For example, conditioning random variables that are de-
terministic transformations of other random variables (e.g.,
the presence of hypoglycemia in the example above, or the
mean of a collection of variables) often results in likeli-
hoods that are normalized by intractable integrals. In other
cases, the likelihood function is implicit to a generative pro-

Soft Constraints for Inference with Declarative Knowledge
cess, rather than explicitly speciﬁed, and hence unavailable
even when the condition is a conventional observation.
In this paper we present predicate exchange: a likelihood-
free method to sample from distributions conditioned on
predicates from a broad class. It is composed of two parts:
1. Predicate Relaxation transforms a predicate such
that it returns a value in a soft Boolean algebra: the
unit interval [0, 1] with continuous logical connectives
˜∧. ˜∨and ¬.
2. Replica Exchange simulates several Markov chains
of a model at different temperatures. Temperature is
a parameter of predicate relaxation which controls the
amount of approximation it introduces. We adapt stan-
dard replica exchange to draw samples that are asymp-
totically exact from the unrelaxed model.
By returning a value in [0, 1] instead of {0, 1}, a soft predi-
cate quantiﬁes the extent to which values of latent variables
are consistent with the predicate. This allows it to serve a
role similar to a likelihood function, and opens up the use of
likelihood-based inference procedures. Orthogonally, we
embed ]0, 1] in a Boolean algebra to support the expres-
sion of domain knowledge of composite Boolean structure.
Continuing the previous example, we may know that a per-
son does not have hypoglycemia, or that they have hypo-
glycemia or hyperglycemia, or neither.
Predicate exchange is motivated by probabilistic program-
ming languages, which have vastly expanded the class of
probabilistic models that can be expressed,, but still heavily
restrict the kinds of predicates that can be conditioned on.
Rather than introduce a new language or modeling formal-
ism, we mirror (Wingate et al., 2011) and provide a light-
weight implementation that performs inference by modu-
lating the execution of a stochastic simulation based model.
This means predicate exchange is easily incorporated into
most frameworks.
Our approach comes with certain limitations. Equality con-
ditions on continuous variables indicate sets of zero mea-
sure. This is problematic because the probability of propos-
ing a satisfying state in a Markov chain becomes zero. In
these cases predicate exchange must sample at a minimum
temperature strictly greater than zero, which is approxi-
mate. Another limitation occurs if a predicate has branches
(e.g., if-then-else statements) which depend on uncertainty
in the model.
In summary we address the problem of conditioning proba-
bilistic models on predicates as a means to express declara-
tive knowledge. In detail, we:
1. Formalize simulation based probabilistic models in
measure theoretic probability, and conditioning as the
imposition of constraints expressed as predicates (Sec-
tion 3).
2. Motivate predicate relaxation (Section 4.1), and pro-
vide a complete soft Boolean algebra.
3. Provide a light-weight implementation of predicate ex-
change (Section 5) through nonstandard execution of
a simulation based model.
4. Evaluate our approach on examples, including a case
study in glycemic forecasting.
2. Related Work
Demand for likelihood-free inference emerged in genet-
ics ecology.
Tavar´e et al.
(1997) compared summary
statistics of the output of a simulation with that of ob-
served data, and rejected mismatches. Weiss et al. (1998)
expanded on this with a tolerance term, so that simula-
tions yielding data sufﬁciently close to the targets were ac-
cepted. Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC) has
come to refer to broad class of methods (Beaumont et al.,
2002; Sisson et al., 2007) in this general regime. Marjo-
ram et al. (2003) simulated Markov Chains according to
the prior, but introduced the accept/reject stage to yield ap-
proximate posterior samples. A small tolerance leads to
a high rejection rate, whereas a large tolerance results in
an unacceptable approximation error. Among several solu-
tions are dynamically decreasing the tolerance (Toni et al.,
2008), importance reweighting samples based on distance
(Wegmann et al., 2009), adapting the tolerance based on
distance (Del Moral et al., 2012; Lenormand et al., 2013),
as well as annealing the tolerance as a temperature parame-
ter (Albert et al., 2015).
Predicate exchange targets simulation models and uses dis-
tance metrics, but targets exact inference without summary
statistics.
A recent approach (Graham et al., 2017) with
similar objectives develops a Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
variant, using a quasi-Newton method during leap-frog in-
tegration to exactly solve the observation constraint. This is
limited to differentiable models conditioned with equality.
Probabilistic
logics
such
as
ProbLog
(Richardson & Domingos,
2006)
and
Markov
logic
networks (De Raedt et al., 2007) allow extend ﬁrst order
logic to declare both models and conditions.
More
recent probabilistic programming systems (Milch et al.,
2007;
Wood et al.,
2014;
Mansinghka et al.,
2014;
Goodman et al., 2008; Carpenter et al., 2017) have focused
on stochastic simulation, and automatically automatically
derive the likelihood function for a rich class of models.
Several continuous (Levin, 2000) and fuzzy (Klir & Yuan,
1995) logics apply model-theoretic tools to metric struc-
tures.
Continuous logics replace the Boolean structure

Soft Constraints for Inference with Declarative Knowledge
Figure 1. Sample from geometric prior (left), whereas (right) is
conditioned on no-intersection constraint
{T, F}, quantiﬁers ∀x and ∃x, and logical connectives with
continuous counter-parts. Predicate relies uses a contin-
uous logic only make inference more tractable. Semanti-
cally, our approach remains within measure theoretic foun-
dations, which relies on hard predicates to condition.
3. Simulation Models
Probabilistic simulation based models specify the step-by-
step causal mechanisms of a domain, and use probability
distributions for any uncertain parameters. A simulation
model can be stochastically executed, using a random num-
ber generator to sample from primitive random variables in
the model. Inference means to simulate the model while
imposing constraints on variables in the model. This is dif-
ﬁcult, since simulation based models lack an explicit like-
lihood function, which is necessary for most inference pro-
cedures.
Conditioning on predicates requires a measure-theoretic
foundation, in which a simulation model is a random vari-
able:
Random Variables.
Probability models lie on top of
probability spaces. A probability space is a measure space
(Ω, H, P), where H is a sigma algebra and P(Ω) = 1
(C¸ ınlar, 2011). Random variables are functions from the
space Ωto a realization space X. As a concrete example
the space Ωcan be thought of as a hypercube, with P be-
ing uniform over that hypercube. To build a normal random
variable, we need a function that maps from Ω→R. If the
underlying probability space is uniform, then this function
is the inverse cumulative distribution function of the nor-
mal.
A model M is a collection of random variables along with
a probability space.
Conditioning
Conditioning a model creates a new model.
As an example consider a model M with two random vari-
ables X1 and X2 that both take real values. Conditioning
M on X1 = 1, deﬁnes a new model M|A based on limit-
ing the measure space Ωto the set A = {ω : X1(ω) = 1}.
The new model is deﬁned on a new probability space
(Ω∩A, {A ∩B, B ∈H}, P/P(A))
(1)
with the same random variables X1 and X2.
Sampling
from M|A produces samples only where X1 = 1
More generally, conditioning on any predicate Y (ω) =
ℓ(X1(ω), . . . , Xn(ω)) deﬁnes a new model deﬁned exactly
as above, where A = {ω : ℓ(X1(ω), . . . , Xn(ω)) = 1}.
Sampling from M|A generates (x1, ..., xn) where ℓis true.
The general construction of new models might require con-
ditioning on sets of measure zero. This process can be
made rigorous via disintegration (Chang & Pollard, 1997).
Disintegration can be thought of as the reversal of building
joint distributions through product measure constructions.
4. Predicate Exchange
To condition a model M on a predicate Y we develop pred-
icate exchange, a likelihood-free inference procedure. It is
composed of two parts:
1. Predicate Relaxation constructs a soft predicate ˜Y
from Y . ˜Y takes values in a soft Boolean algebra: the
unit interval [0, 1] with continuous logical connectives
˜∧. ˜∨and ¬. ˜Y is 1 iff Y is 1, but otherwise takes
nonzero values denoting the degree to which Y is sat-
isﬁed.
2. Replica Exchange is a Markov Chain Monte Carlo
procedure that exploits temperature. The strength by
which ˜Y relaxes Y is modulated by a temperature
parameter α, which trades off between accuracy and
ease of inference. By simulating several replicas of ˜Y
at different temperatures, replica exchange is able to
draw exact samples.
4.1. Predicate Relaxation
A soft predicate ˜Y approximates Y in the sense that when
viewed as a likelihood function on model parameters, ˜Y
has a broader support, assigning nonzero weights to param-
eter values which have zero weight under Y . There are
three desiderata which govern this approximation. First, ˜Y
should have a temperature parameter α that controls the
ﬁdelity of the approximation. In particular, ˜Y should con-
verge to Y as α →0, and to a ﬂat surface as α →∞. Sec-
ond, the ﬁdelity of the approximation should vary monoton-
ically with temperature. Third, ˜Y should be consistent with
Y on 1. That is Y (ω) = 1 iff ˜Y (ω) = 1 at all temperatures.
Deﬁnition 1. A function ˜Y : Ω→[0, 1] parameterized by
α ∈[0, ∞) is a relaxation of Y : Ω→{0, 1} if:
(i) For all ω ∈Ω, limα→0 ˜Y (ω; α) = Y (ω).

Soft Constraints for Inference with Declarative Knowledge
(ii) For all ω ∈Ω, limα→∞˜Y (ω; α) = 1.
(iii) For all α, ˜Y (ω; α) = 1 iff Y (ω) = 1.
(iv) The entropy H( ˜Y (ω; α)) (which characterizes the ﬁ-
delity of the approximation ) is an increasing function
of α.1
Graded Satisﬁability
˜ℓinf (m) represents the degree to
which a model realization m satisﬁes a predicate. Let kα
be a kernel (described below), ρ a distance metric, and A =
{(x1, . . . , xn) | ℓ(x1, . . . , xn) = 1} the satisfying set. ˜ℓinf
(m) is then:
˜ℓinf (m) = kα(ρ(m, A))
(2)
where ρ(x, A) = inf {ρ(x, a) | a ∈A}.
Distance
A relaxation kernel kα bounds distances from
ρ to the unit interval, and is paramterized by temperature α.
We restrict our attention to the squared exponential kernel:
kα(r) = exp

−r2
α

(3)
ρ is parameterized by the type of input.
For canonical
spaces such as R and N we default to the Euclidean dis-
tance. x ˜= y is then deﬁned as exp(∥x −y∥/α). For
composite elements x, y ∈T1 × · · · × Tn of product type,
by default ρ takes a mean ρ(x, y) = (1/n) Pn
i=1 ρ(xi, yi).
Composition
We construct ˜Y from Y compositionally,
by substituting primitive predicates (equality, inequalities
and logical operators) with soft counterparts. For instance
the predicate (x > y) ∨¬(x2 = 2) is transformed into
(x ˜> y) ˜∨˜¬(x2 ˜= 2). In general, we use ˜p to denote a
relaxation of a predicate p.
x ˜= y = kα(ρ(x, y))
x ˜> y = kα(ρ(x, [y, ∞]))
x ˜< y = kα(ρ(y, [−∞, x]))
a ˜∧b = max(a, b)
a ˜∨b = min(a, b)
Figure 2. Soft Primitive Predicates
A soft inequality such as x ˜> y is function of the amount by
which x must be increased (or y decreased) until x > y is
true. This is the distance between x and the interval [y, ∞],
1By compactness, it is integrable for all α, when Ωhas ﬁnite
dimension
Figure 3. Soft predicates as function of x. In all ﬁgures the blue
line denotes the soft predicate, while the red line denotes the pred-
icate to approximate.
x ˜= y = (if x = y then exp(1/α) else 1, kα(ρ(x, y)))
x ˜> y = (kα(ρ(x, [−∞, y])), kα(ρ(x, [y, ∞])))
x ˜< y = (kα(ρ(y, [x, ∞])), kα(ρ(y, [−∞, x])))
(a0, a1) ˜∧(b0, b1) = (a0 ˜∧b0, a1 ˜∧b1)
(a0, a1) ˜∨(b0, b1) = (a0 ˜∨b0, a1 ˜∨b1)
˜¬(a0, a1) = (a1, a0)
Figure 4. Two sided soft primitive predicates
where the distance between a point and any interval [a, b]
is the smallest distance between x and any element in [a, b],
and therefore 0 if x ∈[a, b]:
ρ(x, [a, b]) =





a −b
if x < a
x −b
if x < b
0
otherwise
(4)
Soft negation introduces complications. To illustrate, Fig-
ure 3 (a) shows x ˜> 0 as a function of x. In continuous
logics (Kimmig et al., 2012), the negation of a ∈[0, 1] is
1 −a. However, as shown in Figure 3 (b), this violates
criteria (iii) of predicate relaxation; there are values which
satisfy the hard predicate ¬(x > 0) which do take a value
of 1 in 1 −(x ˜> 0).
The problem of negation arises because ˜Y is consistent
with Y at 1 but not at 0. In other words, ˜Y is a one-sided
approximation. To overcome this challenge, soft primitives
yield a pair (a0, a1) where a0, a0 ∈[0, 1]. a1 preserves con-
sistency with Y on 1, just as before, while a0 preserves con-
sistency with ¬Y on 1. For example if x ˜> 0 = (a0, a1),
then as a function of x, a0 and a1 correspond to Figure 3
(a) and (c) respectively.
A complete two-sided soft logic is shown in Figure 4. Al-
though a two-sided predicate has two components, for the
sake of conditioning we are still concerned only with the
true side a1 in the pair (a0, a1). Soft negation simply swaps
the elements of (a0, a1) to yield (a1, a0).

Soft Constraints for Inference with Declarative Knowledge
Unsatisﬁability
Predicate exchange is unable to deter-
mine if a predicate is unsatisﬁable (e.g. (x > 1) ∧(x <
−1)), and defers to the user to ensure this is the case.
4.2. Approximate Markov Chain Monte Carlo
A soft predicate can serve as an approximate likelihood,
and as a result is amenable to likelihood based inference
methods such as Markov Chain Monte Carlo. MCMC al-
gorithms require a function f that is proportional to the the
target density. In Bayesian inference this is the posterior,
dictated by Bayes’ theorem as the product of the likelihood
and the prior. Approximate inference using soft predicates
takes a similar form.
Let M = (X1, . . . , Xn) be a model, Y be a predicate that
conditions M, and ˜Y (ω) = ˜ℓ(X1(ω), ..., Xn(ω)) be a re-
laxation of Y . Assuming a prior density p, the approximate
posterior f is the product:
f(m) = p(m) · ˜ℓ(m)
(5)
˜ℓdown weights parameter values which violate Y by the
degree to which they violate it. This is modulated by the
temperature α used in the relaxation kernels which consti-
tute ˜ℓ. At maximum temperature ˜ℓhas no effect, and the
approximate posterior f is equal to the prior p. At zero
temperature, f recovers the true posterior since parameter
values which violate the condition are given zero weight.
For illustration, let M = (µ, X) be a model where µ =
β(3, 4), X = N(µ, 1) conditioned on X = 0.5. The ap-
proximate posterior is shown at different temperatures in
Figure 5 and deﬁned as:
fα(µ, x) = β0,1(µ) · Nµ,1(x) · kα(ρ(x, 0.5))
(6)
The temperature parameter trades off between tractability
of inference and the ﬁdelity of the approximation. Too high
and ˜Y will diverge too greatly from Y . Too low and con-
vergence will be slow.
4.3. Replica Exchange
Replica exchange simulates (Swendsen & Wang, 1986) M
replicas at different temperatures, and uses a Metropolis-
Hastings update to periodically swap the temperatures
of chains.
If fαi is an approximate posterior function
at temperature αi, two independent parallel chains sim-
ulating targets fα1(x), fα2(y) they follow a joint target
fα1,α2(x, y) = fα1(x)fα2(y). Replica exchange swaps
states between the chains while preserving the joint tar-
get. Swapping states is equivalent to swapping predicates,
which motivates the name predicate exchange. Concretely,
replica exchange proposes a swap from (x, y) to (y, x), and
Figure 5. Approximate Posterior at varying temperatures. Temper-
ature decreases from top row to bottom. Along each row: (left) is
the prior term p, (center) is the soft likelihood term ˜ℓ, and (right)
is the approximate posterior f
accepts it with probability min(1, A), where:
A = fα1,α2(y, x)
fα1,α2(x, y) = fα1(y)fα2(x)
fα1(x)fα2(y)
(7)
We modify standard replica exchange in two ways: (i) for
exact inference, states which violate the constraint are re-
jected, and (ii) unlike conventional replica exchange which
draws samples only from the zero-temperature chain, we
accept states from any chain so long as fαi(x) = 1.
Replica exchange has a number of hyper-parameters: the
number of parallel chains, the corresponding temperatures,
the swapping schedule.
Several good practices are out-
lined in (Earl & Deem, 2005).
In practice, we logarith-
mically space α between a lower and upper bound (e.g.,
log(α1) = 10−5, log(αM) = 105), and swap states of
chains that are adjacent in temperature (α1 with α2, α2 with
α3, etc) periodically.
5. Implementation
In this section we describe a generic, lightweight imple-
mentation of predicate exchange.
Our approach closely
mirrors (Wingate et al., 2011; Milch et al., 2007) in the
sense that it provides a language independent layer that can
be implemented on top of existing programming languages
and modeling formalisms. Our objective is to twofold: (i)
to compute the prior term p, approximate likelihood term

Soft Constraints for Inference with Declarative Knowledge
Example Program 1
x = rand(N, x, 0, 1)
y = rand(N, y, 0, 1)
cond(x > y)
Return: (x, y)
˜ℓ, and approximate posterior term f (Equation 6) from an
arbitrary program π, and (ii) to perform Replica Exchange
MCMC to sample from this posterior.
A program π can be an arbitrary composition of determin-
istic and stochastic procedures, but all stochastic elements
must come from a set of known elementary random prim-
itives, or ERPs.
ERPs correspond to primitive paramet-
ric distribution families, such as the uniform or normal
distribution.
Let T be a set of ERP types.
Each type
τ ∈T must support (i) evaluation of the conditional den-
sity pτ(x | θ1, ..., θn), and (ii) sampling from the distribu-
tion. Concretely, a conditioned program π is a any nullary
program that contains the statements:
1. rand(τ, n, θ1, ..., θn) returns a random sample from
pτ(x | θ1, ..., θn). n is a unique named described be-
low.
2. cond(y) conditions π. It throws an error if y ∈{0, 1}
is 0, and otherwise allows simulation to resume with
no effect.
Example Program 1 illustrates a simple conditioned model.
5.1. Tracked Soft Execution
The prior term p is computed automatically as the product
of random choices in the program. That is, let πk|x1,...,xk−1
be the k’th ERP encountered in while executing π, xk be
the value it takes, and x denote the set of all values of all
ERPs constructed in the simulation of π, p(x) is the prod-
uct:
p(x) =
K
Y
k=1
pτ(xk | θ1, ..., θn)
(8)
Crucially, the parameters θ1, .., θn for each random variable
may be ﬁxed values or depend on values of other random
variables in π.
Predicate exchange relies on softexecute (Algorithm 3),
which formalizes the soft execution of a program π at tem-
perature α, in the context of dictionary D. D is a mutable
mapping from a set of names to values. In the context of a
particular dictionary, the simulation of a program is deter-
ministic. This allows the simulation of π to be modulated
by controlling the elements of D.
Example Program 2
x = rand(N, x, 0, 1)
if x > 0 then
cond(x = 1)
else
cond(x = −100)
end if
Return: x
softexecute simulates π but within a context where (i) vari-
ables ℓD and pD accumulate prior and approximate poste-
rior values, and (ii) the following operators are redeﬁned:
1. rand(τ, n, θ1, ...θn) returns D(n), and in compliance
with Equation 8 updates pD with the conditional den-
sity. If n is not a key in D, the distribution is sampled
from and D(n) is updated with this value.
2. a op b and op a for op ∈{>, <, =, ∧, ∨, ¬} are re-
placed with the softened counter-parts ˜op ∈{ ˜>, ˜<, ˜=
, ˜∧, ˜∨, ˜¬}.
3. cond(y) updates ˜ℓD with ˜ℓD ˜∧y. y ∈[0, 1] due to soft
primitive operators.
softexecute returns a real value for the approximate poste-
rior of f as a function of the dictionary D.
Control Flow
Programs may have control ﬂow con-
structs, such as if-then-else statements. These may cause
softexecute to return a value that is signiﬁcantly less than
˜ℓinf. This is because if a branch condition is a function
of an uncertain value, then several unexplored alternative
paths could produce values that are closer to the constraint
set. softexecute is ignorant of thees other possibilities For
illustration, consider Example Program 2 2. If x = −1
the condition fails, and the predicate relaxation will yield
x ˜= −100, which is signiﬁcantly larger than if the true
branch were taken.
Problems of this form appear in all forms of program anal-
ysis. This problem is called the path explosion problem,
since the number of possible paths often increases combina-
torially with program size and runtime length. Automated
program testing, which is concerned with ﬁnding program
paths that yield to failure has developed various strategies
(Cadar et al., 2008; Sen et al., 2005).
Unlike automated
testing, probabilistic inference has the stricter requirement
of adhering to the true posterior distribution.
However,
in predicate exchange, we have a latitude on all nonuni-
tary values. This opens up the potential for extending pro-
gram analysis methods to the probabilistic domain in future
work.

Soft Constraints for Inference with Declarative Knowledge
Algorithm 3 Soft Execution: softexecute(π, α, D)
Input: program π, temperature α, dictionary D
Initialize ˜ℓD = 1, pD = 1
Simulate π with following subroutines redeﬁned as:
subroutine rand(τ, n, θ1, ..., θn)
if n ∈D then
x = D(n)
else
x = sample from pτ(x | θ1, ..., θn)
Update dictionary: D(n) = x
end if
pD = pD · pτ(x | θ1, ..., θm)
Return from subroutine: x
end subroutine
subroutine cond(ℓ′)
˜ℓD = ˜ℓD · ˜ℓ′
D
end subroutine
subroutine op(x, . . . ) for op ∈{>, <, =, ∧, ∨, ¬}
Return from subroutine: ˜op (x, . . . )
end subroutine
Return: pD · ˜ℓD
5.2. Replica Exchange
Predicate exchange (Algorithm 4) performs replica ex-
change using softexectute as an approximate posterior. It
takes as input an mcmc algorithm, which simulates an
Markov Chain by manipulating elements of the D. In our
experiments, for ﬁnite dimensional continuous models we
use the No U-Turn Sampler (Hoffman & Gelman, 2014), a
variant of Hamiltonion Monte Carlo. We use reverse-mode
automatic differentiation (Griewank & Walther, 2008) to
compute the negative log gradient of f. For other models
we use standard Metropolis Hastings by deﬁning proposals
on elements in the dictionary. In particular we use the sin-
gle site MH (Wingate et al., 2011) which modiﬁes a single
random variable at a time.
6. Experiments
Small Models
In Figure 6 we demonstrate two examples
of conditioning on predicates which are non trivial. First
we show that the conditioning can be used to truncate a
Gaussian distribution, and the approximation behavior at
varying temperatures. Second we show that two indepen-
dent random variables can be made equal. While simple,
both are a challenge for probabilistic programming systems
because they prevent automatic calculation of the likeli-
hood.
Algorithm 4 Predicate Exchange
Input: program π, temperatures α1, ..., αm, nsamples n
Input: mcmc, nsamples between swaps q
Initialize D = empty collection of dictionarys
Initialize Dinit
1 , ..., Dinit
m empty dictionarys
Deﬁne fαi(D) = softexecute(π, αi, D)
repeat
for i = 1 to m do
D1, ..., Dq = q mcmc samples at temp αi, from Dinit
i
Dinit
i
= Dq
for j = 1 to q do
if fα1(Dj) = 1 then
append Dj to D
end if
end for
end for
for i = m down to 2 do
j = i −1
p = fαi(Dj)fαj(Di)/fαi(Di)fαj(Dj)
if p > random sample in [0, 1] then
swap αi with αj
end if
end for
until D has n elements
Return: D
Figure 6. Left: Density from samples of Gaussian truncated to
[0, 1] through conditioning.
Right: Conditioning on X = Y
where X and Y are independent normal distributions; shown at
different temperatures.
Glucose Model
Type 2 diabetes is a prevalent and costly
condition.
Keeping blood glucose within normal limits
helps prevent the long-term complications of Type 2 di-
abetes like diabetic neuropathy and diabetic retinopathy
(Brownlee & Hirsch, 2006).
Models to predict the tra-
jectories of blood glucose aid in keeping glucose within
normal limits (Zeevi et al., 2015).
Traditional models
have been built from compositions of differential equations
(Albers et al., 2017; Levine et al., 2017) whose parameters
are estimated separately for each patient. An alternative
approach would be to use a ﬂexible sequence model like

Soft Constraints for Inference with Declarative Knowledge
an RNN. The problem with this approach is that an RNN
can extrapolate to glucose values incompatible with human
physiology. This is especially a problem where we have
patients with only a few blood glucose measurements. To
build an RNN model that respects physiology, we condition
on it.
We compare the independent RNN model to the one with
declarative knowledge on a second patient from Physionet
(Moody et al., 2001). Figure 7 plots the results performed
on more than 300 pairs of patients. We see that the condi-
tional model simulates more realistic glucose dynamics for
the patient with only a short observed time-series.
Figure 7. Left: Actual (dotted) and predicted trajectories that were
learned using a partial trajectory.
Center: Distribution of pre-
dicted trajectories learned only using the ﬁrst ten data points and a
tie with a secondary patient. Right, top: MSE when tie is present.
Right, bottom: without tie. Tying expectations has dramatic inﬂu-
ence on prediction error, while as more data is observed, the effect
of tying decreases.
7. Discussion
In this work we expanded the class of predicates that prob-
abilistic models can be conditioned on in practice.
Problems of this form appear in all forms of program anal-
ysis. This problem is called the path explosion problem,
since the number of possible paths often increases combina-
torially with program size and runtime length. Automated
program testing, which is concerned with ﬁnding program
paths that yield to failure has developed various strategies
(Cadar et al., 2008; Sen et al., 2005).
Unlike automated
testing, probabilistic inference has the stricter requirement
of adhering to the true posterior distribution.
However,
in predicate exchange, we have a latitude on all nonuni-
tary values. This opens up the potential for extending pro-
gram analysis methods to the probabilistic domain in future
work.
