Survey of modern Fault Diagnosis methods in networks 
 
 ZiJian Yang 
Beijing Graduate School, Chinese Academy of Sciences  
Beijing, China 

 
 
Yong Wang  
Beijing Graduate School, Chinese Academy of Sciences 
Beijing, China 

 
Abstract—With the advent of modern computer networks, 
fault diagnosis has been a focus of research activity. This paper 
reviews the history of fault diagnosis in networks and discusses 
the 
main 
methods 
in 
information 
gathering 
section, 
information analyzing section and diagnosing and revolving 
section of fault diagnosis in networks. Emphasis will be placed 
upon knowledge-based methods with discussing the advantages 
and shortcomings of the different methods. The survey is 
concluded with a description of some open problems. 
Keywords-fault diagnosis in networks; expert system; 
Bayesian networks; artificial neural network 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Fault diagnosis in networks comes from the equipment 
fault diagnosis, and was first presented in the 1960s. In 1967, 
under the push of the NASA, the ONR (Office of Naval 
Research) took charge of the management of the MFPG 
(Mechanical Failure Preventing Group) [1]. With the large 
and complex systems increasing in spaceflight, manufacture, 
navigation, nuclear industry and hospital, more faults appear. 
There are too many assemblies in each large and complex 
system to cooperate together well all the time. So faults are 
unavoidable and become serious problems that we must face. 
Since the advent of the computer networks, more and more 
application systems lie on networks to share knowledge and 
achieve greater efficiency in production. The reliability of 
networks has increasingly been an important issue. With the 
help of other fields, fault diagnosis in networks develops 
rapidly from 1970s.   
In early time, fault diagnosis in networks depended on 
the professional knowledge and implements. According to 
the ISO/OSI model, one can use a network-tester to monitor 
and measure the parameters of networks on the lower three 
layers (Physical, Data Link, and Network layer); use the 
protocol- analyzer on all layers except for the Physical layer 
to find the network topology, capture and analyze data 
packages, collect and manage information about networks. 
One can also apply some testing commands on the Data-Link 
layer to test if it is broken such as “ping” and “traceroute”. 
This paper is organized as follows: section 2 outlines the 
modern fault diagnosis methods in three phases. Section 3 
focuses on the knowledge-based method. Moreover different 
methods are displayed and compared. Some conclusions are 
drawn in the last section concerning the future direction of 
fault diagnosis in networks. 
II. 
MODERN FAULT DIAGNOSIS METHODS IN NETWORKS 
Early fault diagnosis techniques are too simplex to find 
complex faults and rely too much on the professional 
experience. Compared with the rapid network developing in 
scale and amount, early fault diagnosis techniques are poor 
on collecting information, analyzing data, getting real root 
causes, and becoming inefficient. 
Usually, the fault diagnosis in networks is plotted into 
three sections: information gathering, information analyzing, 
diagnosing and resolving [3] .This paper will discuss modern 
methods used in these sections according to the following 
order. 
A. Information gathering 
There are four central protocols for managing in network 
fault diagnosis: the Internet Engineering Task Force Internet 
(IETF) defines the Simple Network Management Protocol 
(SNMP) [4]; International Organization for Standardization 
(ISO) defines the Common Management Information 
Protocol (CMIP) [5]; Transaction Language 1 (TL1) is 
widely used to manage optical network (SONET) and 
broadband access infrastructure in North America [6]. 
SNMP gains dominant market share and becomes the real 
industrial standard because of the support of CISCO and 
other main network equipment manufacturers. 
Information gathering can be divided into three kinds: 
active, passive, active-passive method [7] [8]. Most active 
methods of gathering information depend on SNMP.  In 
SNMP polling model, agents running on the aim network 
element and a central controller running on a computer are 
necessary. Central controller sends request for aim status to 
the agents periodically. Some network management systems 
use this method, like the Open View system of HP Company, 
the Net View system of IBM Company and the Net 
Management system of SUN Company. For sending request 
to agents and agents echoing timely, networks cost mu 
bandwidth and time on transferring and computing.  
Passive gathering SNMP Trap makes the controller 
monitor the SNMP Trap, without sending anything. So this 
method is real-time. However, Trap is carried by the User 
Data gram Protocol (UDP), which can not ensure the quality 
of transmission. So passive gathering SNMP Trap is easy to 
lose something important.  

For the equipment which does not support the SNMP, 
topology linkage query [9], ICMP message parsing [10], 
syslog analyzing can be used. Some commercial software 
adapts these methods, such as the SPECTRUM system of the 
Cable-tron Company, and the New Web NMS system of the 
Advent Company. 
B. Information analyzing 
Information analyzing is a process in which useful 
symptom is extracted from fault information, and fault is 
located, and isolated. It can be divided into two groups: exact 
inference and approximate inference. Exact inference has 
following 
methods: 
graph 
reduction, 
combinatorial 
optimization, poly tree propagation; approximate inference 
has following methods: method based on simulation, method 
based 
on 
searching, 
and 
transformation 
method. 
Transformation method is more important than others two. 
（Shown in Fig 1.） 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  classification of methods on information analyzing 
C. Diagnosing and resolving 
Diagnosis is a process that makes certain the location and 
type of fault. There are three classes: analytical model-based 
method, signal processing-based method and knowledge-
based method [11]. Table I makes a comparison of them. 
(Shown in Table I)  
 
 
 
III. 
 OVERVIEW OF THE KNOWLEDGE-BASED METHOD 
Among those methods which are used in the Diagnosis 
and resolving, the knowledge-based method becomes the 
primary research filed because of its self-rule and 
intelligence. The knowledge-based method is divided into  
many methods and technologies: fault diagnosis based on 
fault tree, fault diagnosis based on expert system, fault 
diagnosis based on Fuzzy Logic, fault diagnosis based on 
artificial neural network, fault diagnosis based on Grey 
theory, and fault diagnosis based on Bayesian networks. 
(Shown in Fig 2.) 
 
 
Figure 2.  classification of knowledge-based methods 
A. Fault diagnosis based on fault tree (FT)  
FT is a graphic deductive method which puts the worst 
fault status as “the top event”. By searching all causes, FT 
names the cause which can arouse the fault directly as the 
second tier, the cause which can arouse the faults on the 
second tier directly as the third tier, and the basal cause as 
“the bottom event”. All faults between the top event and the 
bottom event are named “the Intermediate event”. FT looks 
for all possible fault models and gets the probability of the 
worst fault. It is an easy tool of fault diagnosis, but it is 
difficult to express the associated relationship, and less 
information content, limited self-educated ability and update 
ability. Researching on the combining FT with the neural 
network and expert system will be the future goal [12]. 
B. Fault diagnosis based on Expert system(ES) 
ES is the most remarkable achievement in fault diagnosis 
in recent years. It resolves problems with mimicking the 
behavior when human experts deal with these problems. ES 
is composed of knowledge base, inference engine, database, 
knowledge 
capturer, 
interpreter 
and 
human-machine 
interface. (Shown in Fig 3.) 
 
 
 
method 
technique adapted 
advantage 
disadvantage 
signal 
processing-
based method 
extracting 
symptoms from 
fault information 
achieve  
easily 
misreporting 
and false 
alarm 
analytical 
model-based 
method 
state estimation with 
mathematical 
statistics , analytic 
functions 
close to the 
truth  
limitation to 
apply widely 
knowledge-
based method 
expert system, fuzzy 
theory, fault tree, 
neural network, 
Bayesian network 
intelligent 
and exact 
limitation 
depend on the 
supported 
theory 
TABLE I.  
METHODS IN DIAGNOSIS AND RESOLVING COMPARING 
Figure 3.  Relation between cells in expert system 

The pivotal and difficult process of ES is knowledge 
capturing, knowledge expression and uncertainty reasoning 
[13] [14]. The fusion of the ES and fuzzy logic, FT, 
Artificial Neural Network will be the future of this 
researching field. 
C.  Fault diagnosis based on Fuzzy Logic(FL) 
FL was proposed as the fuzzy set theory by Lotfi Zadeh 
in 1965. It is a form of many-valued logic and deals with 
reasoning that is approximate rather than fixed and exact.  
Fault diagnosis based on FL depends on the mapping 
relationship between the symptom space and fault space, and 
reasons the fault from symptom. Because of the immature 
fuzzy theory, there is no uniform ways of how to measure 
the membership degree of element in fuzzy set theory and 
the mapping relationship between two fuzzy sets. Experience 
and vast examinations are usually the important ways to 
solve these problems [15] [16].   
D. Fault diagnosis based on artificial neura lnetwork(ANN) 
Artificial neural network (also neural network) is a 
mathematical and computational model that is inspired by 
the structure and functional aspects of biological neural 
networks. ANN consists of an interconnected group of 
artificial neurons, and it processes information using a 
connection approach to computation.  
There are three researching fault diagnosis fields in 
which ANN is applied: as the classifier of diagnosis from the 
perspective of pattern recognition; as the dynamic prediction 
model to diagnosis from the perspective of prediction; as the 
builder of expert system based on ANN from the perspective 
of knowledge processing. The abilities of ANN, such as fault 
tolerant in principle, topology robustness, association, 
adaptive, self-learning, make it play an important role in 
complex system diagnosis, especially the multi-layer 
perception (MLP) theory based on back propagation 
algorithm (BP) is widely applied and successful.  Although 
ANN has advantage in fault diagnosis of nonlinear system, it 
is non-robust at all. So the robustness algorithm and study 
on-line algorithm are the aim of ANN in the future. [17] 
E. Fault diagnosis based on Grey theory (GD) 
This method researches the relationship between 
information which is captured on the systemic point of view, 
i.e., detecting new, unknown diagnosis information from the 
known diagnosis information. It works on the Grey model, 
prediction and Grey correlation analysis. Because the Grey 
theory itself is incomplete, the Grey system diagnosis is 
limited with how to deduce the unknown information from 
the known things. [18] 
F. Fault diagnosis based on Bayesian Networks (BN) 
Bayesian networks ( also Belief networks or directed 
acyclic graphical model) is a probabilistic graphical model 
that represents a set of random variables and their 
conditional dependencies via a directed acyclic graph (DAG) 
and as one of the most effective models in the expression and 
reasoning of uncertain knowledge.  Bayesian networks are 
directed acyclic graphs whose nodes represent random 
variables in the Bayesian sense: they may be observable 
quantities, 
latent 
variables, 
unknown 
parameters 
or 
hypotheses. Edges represent conditional dependencies; nodes 
which are not connected represent variables which are 
conditionally independent of each other. Each node is 
associated with a probability function that takes as input a 
particular set of values for the node's parent variables and 
gives the probability of the variable represented by the node. 
Researchers have made progress in approximate 
inference. Stochastic sampling algorithm, search-based 
algorithm, model simplification algorithm and loopy belief 
propagation Search-based algorithm are improved in 
applicability, complexity, accuracy and efficiency by many 
researchers. However, none of the algorithms can be used 
widely; we must choose the best one according to the special 
problem. The compassion between some Bayesian networks 
reasoning algorithms is list in Table II. [19] 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Structure of Bayesian networks diagnosis model 
TABLE II.  
COMPASSION BETWEEN SOME BAYESIAN NETWORKS REASONING ALGORITHMS 
method 
accuracy 
key of algorithm 
advantage 
stochastic sampling 
proportional to amount of sample 
sampling 
good result, wide application 
search-based 
depend on the selected state 
right state, accurate state set 
good Real-time computing 
model simplification 
depend on simplifing algorithm 
simplify model, accurate estimation 
simple, real-time reasoning 
loopy belief propagation search-based 
depend on iterative times 
astringency of algorithm 
good result with astringency 

 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The paper presents a survey of modern fault Diagnosis 
methods in computer networks, focuses on the contributions 
which we think close to the modern theory and may gain 
some relevance for the future research and practical 
applications.  
As this paper expressed, fault diagnosis in networks has 
made great progress in common fault detecting and 
localization. Each method of fault diagnosis in networks 
relies on one or more theories, which determinates the 
application of method. In table III, the difference between 
the methods based on the knowledge is stated. 
The fields which need to be strengthened are followed: 
 
Improving the gathering and analyzing ability in 
“soft fault”, that means paying attention to the latent 
faults and symptoms. Gathering and analyzing them, 
drawing decision which can figure out problems 
before they appear. 
 Improving the robustness of fault diagnosis 
algorithm.  
V.
