Modeling of Mixed Decision Making Process 
 
Nesrine BEN YAHIA, Narjès BELLAMINE and Henda BEN GHEZALA 
RIADI-GDL laboratory  
National School of Computer Sciences 
Manouba, Tunisia 

 
 
Abstract—Decision making whenever and wherever it is 
happened is key to organizations success. In order to make 
correct decision, individuals, teams and organizations need both 
knowledge management (to manage content) and collaboration 
(to manage group processes) to make that more effective and 
efficient. In this paper, we explain the knowledge management 
and collaboration convergence. Then, we propose a formal 
description of mixed and multimodal decision making (MDM) 
process where decision may be made by three possible modes: 
individual, collective or hybrid. Finally, we explicit the MDM 
process based on UML-G profile. 
Keywords-collaborative 
knowledge 
management; 
mixed 
decision making; dynamicity of actors; UML-G 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Individuals and groups, within organisations, cooperate by 
producing, manipulating and organizing knowledge, and by 
building and refining new collective knowledge. Organisations 
increasingly see their intellectual capital as strategic resources 
that must be managed effectively to achieve competitive 
advantage. This capital consists of the knowledge held in the 
minds of its members, embodied in its procedures and 
decision making processes, and stored in its repositories.   
Subsequently, it should be useful for KM systems and 
Collaboration systems to integrate both kinds of capabilities 
into a single collaborative-and-knowledge based system to 
support joint efforts towards a goal [1].  
Decision making is one of the critical processes where we 
need both knowledge management (that focuses on creation, 
storage, sharing and use of knowledge) and collaboration (that 
focuses on cooperation, communication, coordination and 
coproduction) to make that more effective and efficient. 
This paper aims to explicit step-by-step the multimodal 
decision making (MDM) process at three levels (individual, 
collective and hybrid) and is organized as follows; we start 
with a brief overview of the literature on collaborative 
knowledge management. In section three, we propose formal 
description of MDM process. Finally, section four presents 
our model of MDM process basing on the proposed formal 
description and UML-G profile. 
II. 
ON THE CONVERGENCE OF COLLABORATION AND 
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT 
To facilitate the understanding of collaborative knowledge 
management construct, we start our study in this section by 
defining knowledge management and collaboration. Finally, 
we examine their convergence.  
A. Knowledge Management 
Knowledge is a somewhat elusive concept [2] having 
many different definitions. For example, [3] describes 
knowledge under five different perspectives: state of mind, 
object, process, access to information, and capability. 
Knowledge is considered as the sum of information in the 
context that is dependent on the social group creating it [4]. In 
this paper, we adopt the definition proposed in [5]: Knowledge 
as a fluid mix of framed experience, values, contextual 
information, and expert insight that provides a framework for 
evaluating 
and 
incorporating 
new 
experiences 
and 
information. 
 Knowledge management is largely considered as a 
process that combines various activities. Following a literature 
study of KM practices, [1] synthesize generic KM activities as 
follow: Create (develop new understandings), Collect (acquire 
and record knowledge), Organize (establish relationships and 
context so that collected knowledge can be easily accessed), 
Deliver (share knowledge), Use (bear knowledge on a task). 
In this paper we consider special kind of KM which is 
experience management defined in [6] as the dissemination of 
specific knowledge situated in a particular problem-solving 
context. 
In different viewpoints on KM, many classifications of 
KM approaches can be distinguished, among them we keep 
the classification which is originally proposed by [7] and 
recently adopted by [8]. These authors distinguish two 
approaches of KM: codification versus personalization.  
Codification approaches consider that Knowledge can be 
articulated, codified and disseminated in the form of 
documents, drawings and best practices. Knowledge can be 
shared via knowledge base or repository.  
Personalization approaches consider that Knowledge is 
personal in nature and very difficult to extract from people. 
Knowledge can be shared via interaction between participants. 
International Conference on Information Technology and e-Services 2012
555

B. Collaboration 
We adopt two perspectives of collaboration: the first one is 
that collaboration may be seen as the combination of 
communication, coordination and cooperation [9] and [10]. 
Communication is related to the exchange of messages and 
information among people, coordination is related to the 
management of people their activities and resources, and 
cooperation is related to the production taking place on a 
shared space. The second one is that collaboration is s a 
coordinated activity where the attempt is to construct and 
maintain a shared conception of a problem [11]. 
 Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) is 
considered as an attempt to understand the nature and 
characteristics of collaborative work [12]. It indicates the 
scientific study and theory of how people work together, how 
the computer and related technologies affect group behavior, 
and how technology (groupware) can best be designed and 
built to facilitate group work [9]. 
C. Collaborative Knowledge Management (CKM) 
KM and collaboration are complementary [13]. We 
identify several terms that are used to denote the convergence 
of KM and collaboration:  collaborative knowledge 
management can be considered as a process of collective 
resolution of problems where it is useful to memorize the 
process of making collective decision and to structure the 
group interactions to facilitate problem solving and sharing of 
ideas [14]. 
Collaborative knowledge building can be defined as a 
sequential social process in which participants’ co-construct 
knowledge through social interactions and that incorporates 
multiple distinguishable phases that constitute a cycle of 
personal and social knowledge building [15]. 
Collaborative knowledge sharing can be supposed as the 
development of a shared knowledge repository via groupware 
where conflicts and divergent opinions are an important 
source to aliment it and their resolution generates new 
collaborative knowledge [16]. 
Collaborative knowledge construction can be explained as 
a learning process where collaborative groups built on the new 
ideas offered by others, expressing agreement, disagreement, 
and modifying the ideas being discussed [17]. 
Finally 
Collaborative 
knowledge 
creation 
can 
be 
considered as the ability to increase the knowledge base or 
repository, to develop new capabilities and to enhance existing 
capabilities through combination and knowledge exchange 
[18]. 
D. Proposal of generic framework of CKM 
In order to synthesize the convergence of collaboration and 
KM, we propose a generic framework based on three spaces: 
 
Collaboration Space: concerns the management of 
cooperative tasks and it covers the communication, 
coordination, 
coproduction 
and 
awareness. 
By 
awareness, participants may be conscious and may 
obtain feedback from their actions and from the actions 
of their companions by means of Meta knowledge. 
Awareness 
Meta 
knowledge 
consider 
who 
(participants), what (collective knowledge), how 
(management manner), when and where (time and 
space) of this process. 
 
KM Space: concerns the management of (collective) 
knowledge and it covers the strategies of KM: 
codification (which considers the computer human 
interaction) and personalization (which considers the 
computer human-human interaction).  
 
Actors Space: concerns the management and the 
representation of the different actors and their roles. 
There are three types of actors: individuals (that work 
independently in a private context), groups (dependent 
individuals that work together in the shared context 
and engaged to achieve a common goal) and 
organizations (groups that work collectively and 
collaboratively to achieve the organisational goals).  
Then, the development and the creation of the knowledge 
base must be considered to enhance the collaborative 
management [16]-[18].  
In addition, we join the idea of [16] on managing two 
types of knowledge repository: private and shared.  
 
In a private context and workspace, individual can 
administer a private knowledge base which is only 
accessible by him/her and represents the private view 
of the shared one. 
 
 In the shared context and workspace, there is a unique 
and public knowledge base which is accessible to 
everyone.  
Since individuals can manage two types of knowledge 
memory (private and public), they can work in private or 
shared context by: 
 
Externalization: when individual store knowledge in 
his private knowledge memory, this knowledge is 
converted from tacit to explicit in the private context.  
 
Publication: when individuals make public some 
externalized knowledge and store them in the shared 
knowledge memory so knowledge are moved from 
private to shared context, or when groups add 
knowledge to the shared memory in the public context. 
 
Internalization: when individuals or groups use 
knowledge from the shared knowledge memory so 
knowledge is converted from explicit to tacit 
knowledge however it is moved from shared to private 
context only for individual internalization.  
556

 
Figure 1.  A generic framework of CKM. 
III. 
MULTIMODAL DECISION MAKING  
A. MDM specification 
Our aim here is to focus on multimodal decision making 
process. In this paper, specifically, we consider MDM process 
as a collaborative knowledge management process where 
knowledge represent experiences, Knowledge management 
represents creation, organization and dissemination of specific 
knowledge situated in a particular problem solving context, 
collaborative knowledge management represents process of 
problem resolution (based on four phases as it is proposed by 
[19] and revisited by [20]: intelligence, design, choice and 
review. In the intelligence phase, the problem is identified. In 
the design phase, the proposed alternatives or solutions are 
generated. In the choice phase a solution is selected. Finally, 
in the revision phase the choice is revised and an intelligent 
feedback permits to correct errors), knowledge base represents 
cases base where we store experiences (each case represents a 
problem, different alternatives to solve the problem and the 
final decision), codification KM represents the computer 
human aspect where actors interact with their computer (via 
their private or public KB) to solve their problem, 
personalization KM represents the computer human-human 
aspect where actors interact together with their computers 
(synchronous or asynchronous, located or distributed) to solve 
their (collective) problem. 
The essential property of MDM here, we argue, is that it 
enables three modes of problem resolution and decision 
making: individual mode (computer human interaction), 
collective mode (computer human-human interaction) and 
hybrid mode (navigation between the two previous cases). 
In this paper, we argue also that one of the interesting 
points to be considered in the MDM process is the actors’ 
dynamicity as it represents a process by which individuals 
formulate the problem (together), generate and evaluate 
solutions (together) and make decision (together).  
Thus, we characterize MDM process by actor oriented 
perspective where actors guide the MDM process and orient 
the resolution mode in all phases (problem formulation, 
solutions generation or decision making). 
Dynamicity of actors is useful especially when we talk 
about hybrid mode resolution (when we navigate between the 
two modes individual and collective). For example, if one 
individual has a problem he can choose to construct and 
formalize it alone or with others to help him. After problem 
conception (individual or collective), the same individual can 
generate solutions alone or with others. After solutions 
conception (individual or collective), he can choose one 
alternative alone or with others. 
Accordingly, we distinguish between three types of actors: 
problem-constructor, solution-constructor and decision-maker: 
 
Problem-formulator: identify, formulate and structure 
the problem. His aim is to find out the problem. 
 
Solution-generator: generate and propose solutions. 
His aim is to generate alternatives, set criteria and 
scenarios to evaluate alternative. 
 
Decision-maker: select and choose one alternative. His 
aim is to choose alternative(s) and determine the 
outcome of chosen alternatives. 
In the problem conception, MDM process can be 
characterized as single problem- formulator or multi problem- 
formulator. In the solutions conception, MDM process can be 
characterized as single solution- generator or multi solution- 
generator. In the selection, MDM process can be characterized 
as single decision-maker or multi decision-maker. 
 
Figure 2.  MDM: dynamicity of actors’ perspective. 
The individual mode of problem resolution corresponds to 
the case single problem-formulator, single solution-generator 
and single decision-maker.  
The collective mode of problem resolution corresponds to 
the case multi problem-formulator, multi solution-generator 
and multi decision-maker.  
The navigate or hybrid mode of problem resolution 
corresponds to the rest cases. 
557

B. MDM Formal description  
In order to formalize and organize the MDM process, we 
propose a formal description using vector model as follow:  
<A,P,S,D>. 
Where A contains actors participating to the different 
activities of the MDM, and so A=<Ap, As, Ad>: 
Ap represents the actors that participate to the problem 
conception, |Ap| = nbr(problem-formulators). 
As represents the actors that participate to the solutions 
conception, |As| = nbr(solution-generators). 
Ad represents the actors that participate to the decision 
making, |Ad| = nbr(decision-makers). 
 a  A, a = <a1, a2,…, an> where ai represents attributes of 
a so the profile of a. 
Then, P represents the problem description: P = <p1, p2,…, 
pm> where pi represent attributes of P. 
S represents the solutions space: S = Sc  Sp , and   s  S, 
s = <s1, s2,…, sm> where si represent attributes of s. 
Sc represents the different solutions or alternatives that are 
generating from the private and/or knowledge bases (via 
codification approach of knowledge management) and Sp 
represents the different solutions or alternatives that are 
generating 
and 
proposed 
by 
solution 
makers 
(via 
personalization approach of knowledge management). 
If |As|= 1 (only the problem maker will solve his own 
problem using computer human interaction without interacting 
with others) then Sp =  and S = Sc.  
But, if |As|> 1 (group of users will solve shared problem 
using computer human-human interaction) then Sp ≠ . 
Finally, D represents the final decision (D
S), it 
corresponds to the output of MDM process which is individual 
if |Ad| = 1 and collective if | Ad| > 1.   
C. MDM process model 
In order to explicit and explore step-by-step the flow 
control of MDM process, we combine the use of UML 2.0 
activity diagram and UML-G profile. 
In activity diagram UML 2.0, swimlanes are manipulated 
to group activities performed by the same actor. So, in our 
case we need three swimlanes (the first one contains activities 
of problem-formulator, the second one contains activities of 
solution-generator and the third one contains activities of 
decision-maker). Guards of decision are based on the proposed 
formal description of MDM. 
In order to model shared element, we use UML-G 
introduced in [21] as an UML profile for modeling groupware. 
The stereotype <<shared>> is introduced and can be applied 
to any UML model element. Instances of elements marked as 
<<shared>> are potentially accessible from all users. 
<<sharedRole>> and <<sharedActor>> are also introduced as 
separate stereotypes in order to mark their special meaning. 
With <<sharedRole>> roles in cooperative sessions can be 
shared between several actors and with <<sharedActor>> 
actors in cooperative sessions can take several roles. Similarly, 
they introduce the stereotype <<sharedActivity>> to denote all 
collective activities. 
In MDM process now, 
 a
, a is marked with both 
stereotypes <<sharedRole>> and <<sharedActor>> as a may 
respectively share his role with others (i.e.  if a  Ap and |Ap|> 
1 and/or if a  As and |As|> 1 and/or if a  Ad and |Ad|> 1) and 
have many roles at the same time (i.e. a  Ap  As or a  Ap  
Ad or a  As  Ad or a  Ap  As  Ad). 
As shown in figure 3, MDM process contains the 
following activities:  
Formulate P: represents the problem conception and 
formulation which is individual if |Ap|= 1(the problem-
formulator formalizes his own problem alone) and collective if 
|Ap|> 1(the problem-formulators share the problem conception 
and make consensus of problem representation). 
Generate S: represents the solutions conception which is 
individual if |As| = 1and collective if |As|> 1. In the first case, 
solution-generator uses his own private KB and public KB to 
construct Sc by finding out similar stored problem and consult 
their resolution. In the second case, there are two possible 
ways: the solution-generators co-construct SP by proposing 
directly their alternatives without using the KB or they co-
construct SP and Sc using private and public KB. 
Evaluate S: represents the selection of criteria and strategy 
to evaluate proposed alternatives (by voting, by ordering or by 
affecting priorities).   
Make D: represents the decision making which is 
individual if |Ad|= 1and collective if |Ad|> 1. Individual 
decision will be stored in individual knowledge base and 
collective decision (marked with <<Shared>> stereotype) will 
be stored in shared knowledge base. 
Maintain: represents maintenance and review of final 
(collective) decision. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we introduce Multimodal Decision Making 
process as collaborative knowledge management process that 
covers three modes of problem resolution  and decision 
making (individual, collective and hybrid) and is characterized 
by dynamicity of actors where we separate between three 
types of actor (problem-formulator, solution-generator and 
decision-maker). In order to explicit step-by-step the MDM 
process, we combine the use of a proposed formal model with 
UML-G to elaborate an activity diagram of this process.   
558

 
Figure 3.  MDM process: UML activity diagram.
