AI-Driven Conﬁdential Computing across Edge-to-Cloud Continuum
Sm Zobaed
A Dissertation presented to the Graduate Faculty
in Partial Fulﬁllment of the Requirements for the Degree
Doctor of Philosophy
University of Louisiana at Lafayette
Fall 2022
APPROVED:
Mohsen Amini Salehi, Chair
The Center for Advanced Computer Studies
Sheng Chen
The Center for Advanced Computer Studies
Raju Gottumukkala
Informatics Research Institute
Xiali Hei
The Center for Advanced Computer Studies
Li Chen
The Center for Advanced Computer Studies
Mary Farmer-Kaiser
Dean of the Graduate School
arXiv:2301.00928v1  [cs.DC]  3 Jan 2023

© Sm Zobaed
2022
All Rights Reserved

Abstract
With the meteoric growth of technology, both individuals and organizations
are widely adopting cloud services to mitigate the burdens of maintenance. Despite
its scalability and ease of use, many potential cloud users who own sensitive data
refrain from fully utilizing cloud services due to valid conﬁdentiality concerns.
Maintaining data conﬁdentiality for data at rest and in transit has been widely
explored but data remains vulnerable in the cloud while it is in use. This
vulnerability is further elevated once the scope of computing spans across the
edge-to-cloud continuum. From the notion of safeguarding, conﬁdential data needs
to be encrypted while oﬄoading from users’ premises. Although adopting user-side
encryption ensures data conﬁdentiality, it limits the ability to data processing.
Subsequently, we are limited to performing only low-level operations (e.g., string
pattern matching). Accordingly, the goal of this dissertation is to enable data
conﬁdentiality by adopting conﬁdential computing across the continuum. Towards
this goal, one approach we explore is to separate the intelligence aspect of data
processing from the pattern-matching aspect. We present our approach to make
conﬁdential data clustering on the cloud, and then develop conﬁdential search
service across edge-to-cloud for unstructured text data. Our proposed clustering
solution named ClusPr, performs topic-based clustering for static and dynamic
datasets that improves cluster coherency up to 30%-to-60% when compared with
other encryption-based clustering techniques. Our trusted enterprise search service
named SAED, provides context-aware and personalized semantic search over
iii

conﬁdential data across the continuum. Evaluation results, veriﬁed by human users,
demonstrates that SAED can improve the relevancy of the retrieved search results
by ≈24% for plain-text and 75% for encrypted datasets. We realized that enabling
conﬁdential computing across edge-to-cloud requires major contribution from the
edge tiers particularly to run multiple Deep Learning (DL) services concurrently.
This raises memory contention on the edge tier. To resolve the contention, we
propose Edge-MultiAI framework to manage Neural Network (NN) models of DL
applications such that it can meet the latency constraints of the DL applications
without compromising inference accuracy. Our evaluation conﬁrms that
Edge-MultiAI can stimulate the degree of multi-tenancy by 2× on the edge tier.
iv

To my Creator, the Almighty Allah (SWT), my master prophet Muhammad (pbuh),
who taught us the purpose of life, my parents, Md Mazharul Islam and Jubaida
Naznin, who never stop providing support in countless ways, my enlighteners, Md
Fazle Rabby, Md Sazib Hasan who have provided enormous inspiration regardless of
the rainy or shiny days throughout the journey with the fullest and truest attention,
my pioneer since childhood, Jahid Md Mahabub Islam, who has been acting as a
LiDAR through the sea of darkness, my asymptotic remembrance, Farzana Hasan,
whom I am forever grateful, my mentors, Muhammad Usama Islam, Md Istiaq
Hossain, Jubair Yusuf, Farhan Tanvir, my only sister, Mantika Mahbuba, and to all
my friends and beloved ones.
