International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011 
DOI : 10.5121/ijaia.2011.2101                                                                                                                      1 
EVIDENCE FEED FORWARD HIDDEN MARKOV 
MODEL: A NEW TYPE OF HIDDEN MARKOV 
MODEL 
Michael Del Rose1, Christian Wagner2, and Philip Frederick1 
1U.S. Army Tank Automotive Research, Development, and Engineering Center, 
Warren, Michigan, U.S.A 
2Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Oakland University, Rochester, 
Michigan, U.S.A 
 
ABSTRACT 
The ability to predict the intentions of people based solely on their visual actions is a skill only performed 
by humans and animals.  The intelligence of current computer algorithms has not reached this level of 
complexity, but there are several research efforts that are working towards it.  With the number of 
classification algorithms available, it is hard to determine which algorithm works best for a particular 
situation.  In classification of visual human intent data, Hidden Markov Models (HMM), and their 
variants, are leading candidates. 
The inability of HMMs to provide a probability in the observation to observation linkages is a big 
downfall in this classification technique.  If a person is visually identifying an action of another person, 
they monitor patterns in the observations.  By estimating the next observation, people have the ability to 
summarize the actions, and thus determine, with pretty good accuracy, the intention of the person 
performing the action.  These visual cues and linkages are important in creating intelligent algorithms 
for determining human actions based on visual observations. 
The Evidence Feed Forward Hidden Markov Model is a newly developed algorithm which provides 
observation to observation linkages.  The following research addresses the theory behind Evidence Feed 
Forward HMMs, provides mathematical proofs of their learning of these parameters to optimize the 
likelihood of observations with a Evidence Feed Forwards HMM, which is important in all 
computational intelligence algorithm, and gives comparative examples with standard HMMs in 
classification of both visual action data and measurement data; thus providing a strong base for 
Evidence Feed Forward HMMs in classification of many types of problems. 
KEYWORDS 
Hidden Markov Model, Visual Human Intent Analysis, Visual Understanding, Image Processing, 
Artificial Intelligence 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Visual Understanding (VU) is the ability for a machine to understand events, items, and 
scenarios through visual cues, or visual data.  It is a very important and complex process used 
in many artificial and computational intelligence research programs.  The need for VU is 
increasing with the growing advances in technology that require  VU algorithms to be taken out 
of the research labs and into fully developed programs [11, 12, 13, 32, 83].   
 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011 
2 
 
A sub research area of VU is Visual Human Intent Analysis (VHIA).  This area may also be 
referred to as visual human behavior identification, action or activity recognition, and 
understanding human actions from visual cues.  VHIA concentrates on the visual identification 
of actions made by a human.  There are many different names associated with VHIA that 
describe the specific process.  In static self security systems visual human behavior 
identification systems will aide or replace security guards monitoring CCTV feeds [13].  
Television stations and the gaming community will require activity recognition systems to 
automatically categorize and store or quickly search for certain scenes in a database [12].  The 
military is pushing robotics to replace the soldier, thus requiring the need to understand human 
actions from visual cues to determine hostile actions from people so the robot can take 
appropriate actions to secure itself [83].  These are just a few names of the many names for 
VHIA.   
 
Evidence Feed Forward Hidden Markov Models are designed to better handle many of the 
shortcomings not addressed in current classification systems.  The motivation of this new 
research is to provide a way of better detecting human movements for classification of the 
person’s activity.  This classification will be based on the observations being linked, not just 
linking observations with events as described in standard Hidden Markov Models.  Moving 
from better classifications in visual human activity to other types of non-visual data will be 
discussed.  Classification results of Evidence Feed Forward Hidden Markov Models compared 
with results of standard Hidden Markov Models will also be shown for both visual and non-
visual data.  The goal of this research is to develop a more robust classification system then 
current standard Hidden Markov Models and to identify a new way of looking at the links 
between evidences from the classification system; in the case of Evidence Feed Forward 
HMMs this is described as observation to observation links.   
 
The first section of this paper is the introduction.  The second section is a brief overview of 
current research in the area of VHIA.  The third section describes the Evidence Feed Forward 
theory and derives the equations for the three common problems of HMMs.  The fourth and 
fifth sections use the Evidence Feed Forward HMM developed algorithms and apply them to 
two examples, one measurement based and one visual based.  The final section is the 
conclusion. 
2. CURRENT RESEARCH IN THE AREA OF VISUAL HUMAN INTENT 
ANALYSIS 
The current research in the area of VHIA is split into six sub-sections which best describes the 
methods based on the volume of work: Non-traditional artificial intelligent (AI) methods, 
traditional AI methods, Markov models and Bayesian networks, grammars, traditional hidden 
Markov models (HMM), and non-traditional HMMs. 
 
Non-traditional AI methods general do not have learning in them and rely on heavy processing 
of the data to determine the intent of the person.  M. Cristani et al [1] uses non-traditional AI 
methods by taking in both audio and visual data to determine simple events in an office.  First 
they remove foreground objects and segment the images in the sequence.  This output is 
coupled with the audio data and a threshold detection process is used to identify unusual events.  
These event sequences are put into an audio visual concurrence matrix (AVC) to compare with 
known AVC events.   
 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011 
3 
 
Template matching is performed by M. Dimitrijevic et. al. [2].  They developed a template 
database of actions based on five male and three female people.  Each human action is 
represented by three frames of their 2D silhouette at different stages of the activity: the frame 
when the person first touches the ground with one of his/her feet, the frame at the midstride of 
the step, and the end frame when the person finishes touching the ground with the same foot.  
The three frame sets were taken from seven camera positions.  When determining the event, 
they use a modified Chamfer’s distance calculation to match to the template sequences in the 
database. 
 
Traditional AI methods usually have some type of learning, either with known or unknown 
outcomes.  Typical methods would include neural networks, fuzzy systems, and other common 
AI techniques.  H. Stern et al. [3] created a prototype fuzzy system for picture understanding of 
surveillance cameras.  His model is split into three parts, pre-processing module, a static object 
fuzzy system module, and a dynamic temporal fuzzy system module.  The static fuzzy system 
module classifies pre-processed data as a single person, two people, three people, many people, 
or no people.  The dynamic fuzzy system determines the intent of the person based on the 
temporal movements. 
 
Grammars are often used to describe the sequence of events, usually through a type of words or 
characters.  These words are developed by extrapolating the action to common words, which 
grouped together may make a sentence describing the action (in a non-literal sense).  A. Ogale 
et. al. [4] uses probabilistic context free grammars (PCFG) in short action sequences of a person 
from video.  Body poses are stored as silhouettes which are used in the construction of the 
PCFG.  Pairs of frames are constructed based on their time slot: the pose from frame 1 and 2 are 
paired, the pose from frame 2 and 3 are paired, and so on.  These pairs construct the PCFG for 
the given action.  When testing the algorithm, the same procedure is followed.  Comparing the 
testing data with the trained data is accomplished through Bayes: P(sk|pi) = P(pi|sk)P(sk)/P(pi), 
where sk is the kth silhouette and pi is the ith pose. 
 
There are a number of traditional and non-traditional Hidden Markov Models (HMM) that are 
used in trying to understand peoples actions based on visual sequences.  Traditional HMMs are 
used to classify items that have a flow to them.  This flow, generally related to time, determines 
the specific body pose of the action sequence and the HMM determines how likely the flow is.  
For non-traditional HMMs, they are just an offshoot to the standard HMM except they add 
another facet which provides better results based on the type of data coming in, generally used 
in specific examples.  A few include Yamato et. al. [5] used HMMs to recognize six tennis 
strokes with a 25x25 mess feature matrix to describe body positions in each frame.  Wilson and 
Bobick [6] use a Parametric Hidden Markov Model (PHMM) to recognize hand gesture.  Oliver 
et. al. [7] developed a method to detect and classify interactions between people using a 
Coupled Hidden Markov Model (CHMM) based on simulations.  Multi-Observation Hidden 
Markov Models (MOHMM) are discussed in both [8] and [9] from Xaing and Gong for 
recognizing break points in video content for separation of activities and detect piggybacking of 
peoples going through a security door, respectively. 
3. Evidence Feed Forward Hidden Markov Models 
3.1 Evidence Feed Forward Hidden Markov Model Introduction 
The Evidence Feed Forward Hidden Markov Model is more than an extension or a variance of 
Hidden Markov Models (HMM), like Parametric HMMs or Hierarchical HMMs, because it 

International Journal of Artificia
 
links the current observations to
associated with this, and has the
Forward HMM gives the impre
HMM theory, by providing the l
which in the strict sense, Markov
 
The assumption of breaking caus
reason for making the model is to
causality rule, at least how we lo
note that in many cases, previous
weather example found in many
and would like to know whether
observation of his boss coming i
make his decision.  Figure 1 sho
No Rain (NR).  The observation
(NU). This example shows that
layer and not vice versa.  Also
weather (with some probability
probability of the current obse
example, current observation of 
tomorrow’s observation of an 
observation as another event car
probability in the HMM that ha
events can be tied together in th
event of the person seeing the um
Causality of the observation is 
underlying reason the observatio
by the boss and not looked at 
Specifically, if, for example, th
raining then one can probably as
next day since he did not like ge
This connects the evidence of ea
Figure 2. 
 
Figure 1:  Weather example usi
Rain (R) and No Rain (NR).  The
al Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, Janu
o the next observation in the sequence, assigns a 
e ability to better describe visual actions.   The Evi
ession of disregarding the rules of causality, as su
link between observations that is not through the hid
v models current state only depends on the previous 
sality is relatively true in standard HMMs, but if you
o “model the event” not create real world, then we c
ook at causality in modeling with HMMs.  It is also i
s events will affect future events.  Take, for example
y textbooks:  A person is locked inside a windowle
r it is raining or not outside.  The only evidence he
inside with or without an umbrella.  He constructs a
ows the hidden layer is represented by the nodes, R
n is represented by the nodes, Umbrella (U) and N
t the evidence (observation) is only dependent on 
o, the hidden layer is only dependent on the prev
y).  HMMs and their variants do not take into a
ervation’s effect on the next observation. Obviou
an umbrella (or no observation of an umbrella) doe
umbrella (or no umbrella).  However, if you l
rried out by the boss, then you can see that there m
as been overlooked when modeling this example.  
his model; the event of the boss choosing an umbre
mbrella.  Independence with respect to the model is
looked at differently than in a standard HMM m
ons have an effect on the next observation is based o
as just an observation.  Thus, causality is still 
e boss comes into the building without an umbrel
ssume that the boss may be more likely to carry an u
etting wet.  The same may be true if he did carry a
ach event to the evidence of the next nodes event a
ing HMMs.  The nodes in the hidden layer are repr
e nodes in the observation layer are represented by U
ary 2011 
4 
probability 
idence Feed 
uggested by 
dden nodes, 
states.   
u look at the 
an relax the 
mportant to 
e a common 
ess building 
e has is the 
an HMM to 
Rain (R) and 
No Umbrella 
the hidden 
vious day’s 
account the 
usly, in our 
es not affect 
look at the 
may be some 
These two 
ella and the 
s still intact.  
model.  The 
on the event 
adhered to.  
lla and it is 
umbrella the 
an umbrella.  
as shown in 
 
resented by 
U and NU. 

International Journal of Artificia
 
Figure 2:  Weather example us
evidence (marked U and NU) an
occurring based on the previous e
 
In this example, Figure 2 show
represented as bi-directional edg
direction.  This is not the case. 
complexity so that the probabil
evidence and the current hidden
edges are illustrated as such du
assume that the boss forgets his 
probability associated with the b
he did not like the feeling of ge
wet, thus puts more emphasis on
can be assumed that the probabil
the same probability as the edge
addition to the probabilities base
directly related to.  
  
3.2 Evidence Feed Forward 
 
Before jumping into deriving equ
total number of hidden nodes an
number of transitions (or time).  
state at time t is Si where 1 ≤ i ≤
means the observation at time t is
 
The probability of transitioning 
the current state and j is the next
the aij’s.  The rows represent the 
there are three hidden nodes in th
al Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, Janu
sing Evidence Feed-Forward HMMs.  Linkages b
nd the other evidences represent the probability of th
evidence. 
ws that the edges connecting observations to obser
ges which may suggest that the probability is the sam
 In fact, it can be shown that the problem can be 
lities of the edges connecting the evidence rely o
n state and not on the future hidden state.  The bi
ue to simplification of the drawing.  In this weathe
umbrella while it is raining outside.  One can assu
boss carrying his umbrella the next day should be g
etting wet.  He probably wants to reduce his chance
n carrying an umbrella whether it is raining outside
lity represented in the edge from U given R to U giv
e going to U given R.  In a sense, one can think o
ed on the person (or thing) which the outcome (obs
Hidden Markov model derivation 
uations, the variables should formally be defined.  L
nd M be the total number of observations.  Let T 
Let Qt be the current state at time t, 1≤ t ≤ T; Qt = S
≤ N.  The observations at time t are represented by O
s Vh where 1 ≤ h ≤ M. 
from one hidden state to another is captured by aij
t state, 1 ≤  i,j ≤ N.  Let A be an NxN matrix which 
current state (i) and the columns represent the next 
he Evidence Feed Forward HMM, N=3, then A woul
  
11
12
13
21
22
32
31
32
33
	 
ary 2011 
5 
 
between the 
he evidence 
rvations are 
me in either 
reduced in 
only on the 
i-directional 
er example, 
ume that the 
reater since 
e of getting 
e or not.  It 
ven NR has 
of this as an 
servation) is 
Let N be the 
be the total 
Si means the 
Ot.  Ot = Vh 
, where i is 
captures all 
state (j).  If 
ld be: 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011 
6 
 
Let bjh be the probability of observing Vh while in state Sj.  Let B be an NxM matrix which 
holds the observation probabilities.  If there were three hidden layers and two observations, 
N=3 and M=2, then B would be 

  
11
12
21
22
31
32
	 
Let ci(h,k) be the probability of being in state Si and currently observing Vh with the next 
observation being Vk for 1 ≤ h,k ≤ M.  Let C be the MxMxN matrix represented as shown 
below 

  
1,1

1,2

2,1

2,2,   1,1
1,2
2,1
2,2, and   1,1
1,2
2,1
2,2. 
Let the probabilities of starting in state Si be represented as πi.  π is a 1xN vector which holds all 
the πi values.    


 for a three hidden node Evidence Feed-Forward HMM. 
 
Similar to the standard HMM, the Evidence Feed Forward HMM is represented by λ but with 
an added parameter.  λ has the parameters A, B, C, and π and can be written as λ=(π, A, B, C).  
Either λ or (π, A, B, C) can represent the Evidence Feed Forward HMM.  Given the model λ at 
time t in the current state Si observing Vh, what is the probability of being in state Sj observing 
Vk?  The calculation of transitioning from state Si to state Sj is aij, observing Vh from state Sj is 
bjh, and being in state Si observing Vh with next observation being Vk is ci(h,k).  This 
probability is aij·bjh·ci(h,k).  When possible, to increase the readability, Si for all i will be 
represented as just i.  Also, Vh for all h will be represented by just h. 
There are three typical problems that all HMMs should solve: 
1. What is the probability of the observation sequence O = (O1,O2,…,OT) given the model 
λ?   This is asking to find P(O|λ). 
2. What is the most optimal hidden state path given the observations O and the model λ?  
This is asking to solve P(Q|O,λ) where Q = (Q1,Q2,…,QT). 
3. Given a number of observations, what is the optimal parameters of λ which maximizes 
P(O|λ)?  This is the learning problem. 
For a detailed tutorial on how standard HMMs solve these problems the reader is referred to 
Rabiner [13].   
 
To solve the first problem, “What is the probability of the observation sequence O = 
(O1,O2,…,OT) given the model λ?”, a forward algorithm procedure is developed to compute 
αi(t) = p(O1,O2,…Ot,Qt = i|λ).  When t = T, P(O|λ) is found by summing all the αi’s at time T.  
The forward algorithm procedure is: 
1. αi(1) = πibi(O1) for all i, 0 ≤ i, t ≤ T, and bi(O1) = bih for some h which O1 = Vh.  Notice 
that there is no c term because this is the initial starting state calculation for αi so there 
is no observation to observation in the calculation of the initial probabilities. 
2. αj(t+1) = ∑




 !", !"#
$ !"#
, where ci(Ot,Ot+1) is ci(h,k) for Ot = Vh 
and Ot+1 = Vk and N is the total number of hidden states. 
3. P(O|λ) = ∑
%



. 
From the final part of step 2 where αi(T) =  P(O1,O2,…,OT,QT = i|λ), we find the probability of 
the observation sequence and the final state QT = i given the model.  By summing up all the αi’s 
we get the final probability of P(O|λ) shown in step three. 
 
A backwards algorithm procedure can also be developed to find P(O|λ).  In the backwards 
algorithm, the starting state is at time T and the algorithm is worked backwards towards time t.  
The variable βi is defined as βi(t) = P(Ot+1,Ot+2,…,OT | Qt = i, λ). 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011 
7 
 
1. βi(T) = 1 
2. βi(t) = ∑
  !"#


 

&  ' 1$!", !"#
 
3. P(O|λ) = ∑
&1



!
. 
It should be noted that the probability of the observations given the model using both the 
forward and backwards algorithms are used later to help find answers to the remaining two 
Evidence Feed-Forward HMM problems. 
 
The second common HMM problem which the Evidence Feed-Forward HMM should solve is 
computing the optimal path of hidden states from the observations given the model.  Optimal 
path could mean many different things.  One way to look at optimal paths is to find the 
maximum probability moving from one state/observation to another, considering only the path 
which is maximum for only the current transition.  This has the possibility of transitioning to a 
state which leaving from is impossible.   
 
In this research, finding the optimal path is considered the same as finding the maximum 
probability for the entire series and not individual maximums. Optimal path is assumed that one 
is looking for the path that gives the maximum probability of the state sequence given the 
observations and the model; maximizing P(Q|O,λ). This solution requires the use of both the 
forward and backwards algorithms.  To do this two new variables must be created, δ and Path.  
δ is defined as the running probability of paths at time t.  Path is the current path found from 
computing δ. 
1. δ1(i) = πibi(O1).  Path = []. 
2. δt(j) = max
++,-".
  !"!".
, !"$.  Path is the state which this is maximized.  
Add the state to the Path. 
3. Final step is finding the state which maximizes δT(i) for 1 ≤ i ≤ n. 
The first step of calculating the δ value is to assign each δ value the probability of starting in 
each of the states.  The recursion step continues to keeps the maximum value throughout the 
model.  The final step finds the final hidden node which is the maximum of all the δi’s at time 
T. 
 
The third and final problem that HMMs should be able to solve is the learning problem.  To 
learn, assume you have a number of observations with known results.  These observations are 
used to calculate new parameters that maximize the probability of the observations given the 
model, P(O|λ).   To do this, re-estimation of parameters for the model must increase P(O| λ ) 
where the re-estimated model parameters are defined as: 
 
/  012003 45607 89 :60; :4 ;0 :  :60   1 
 
/  012003 45607 89 74;::84; 9786 ;0 : 8 ;0 <
012003 45607 89 74;::84; 9786 ;0 :
 
 

012003 45607 89 :60; :4 ;0 <
 
 
AB, C 

 
 
First, define the variable γi(t) to be the probability of being in state i at time t for the sequence 
of observations O and the model λ.  That is: 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011 
8 
 
F  GH"  :|!, J 
           GH"  :, !|J
G!|J
 
        
GH"  :, !|J
∑
GH"  <, !|J

 

                                              0K. 1 
Earlier, the variable αi(t) was defined in the forward algorithm as  
αi(t) = P(O1,O2,…,Ot, Qt = i|λ) 
and βi(t) was defined in the backwards algorithm as 
βi(t) = P(Ot+1,Ot+2,…,OT|Qt = i,λ) 
Multiplying these together to get 
αi(t)· βi(t) = P(O1,O2,…,Ot, Qt = i|λ)· P(Ot+1,Ot+2,…,OT|Qt = i,λ) 
which is the same as P(Qt = i, O|λ).  Thus, we can calculate γi(t) from equation 1 as 
F 
 · &
∑
  · & 

 

 
Now, define the new variable ξij(t) to be the probability of being in state i at time t and state j at 
time t+1 given the observation sequence O and the model λ.  That is 
N   GH"  :, H"#
  <|!, J 
The equation for ξij(t) can be re-written as 
N   GH"  :, H"#
  <, !|J
G!|J
 
                                               
GH"  :, H"#
  <, !|J
∑
∑
GH"  :, H"#
  <, !|J

 




                           0K. 2 
 
From the forward algorithm, we know that at state Qt = i and left is equal to αi(t).  From the 
backwards algorithm, we know that at state Qt+1 = j and right is equal to βj(t).  We also know 
that the probability of going from state Qt = i to Qt+1 = j with our observations is equal to (the 
probability of transition from state i to state j) times (the probability of observing Ot+1 at state j) 
times (the probability of being in state i observing Ot and next observing Ot+1); i.e. P(Qt = i,Qt+1 
= j,O|λ) = αi(t)·aijbjkci(h,k)·βj(t).  Equation 2 can now be written as: 
N  
 ·   DB, C · &  ' 1
∑
∑
 ·   DB, C · &  ' 1

 




 
Notice that if you sum γi(t) across all of t, ∑
F
O
"

, you get the expected number of times in 
state i.  Also, if you sum ξij(t) across all of t, ∑
N 
O.

"

, you get the expected transitions from 
state i to state j.  We can now write the equations for re-estimating the parameters of the model 
with the given observations to maximize P(O|λ). 
 
/  012003 45607 89 :60; :4 ;0 :  :60   1 
/  F1 
 
/  012003 45607 89 74;::84; 9786 ;0 : 8 ;0 <
012003 45607 89 74;::84; 9786 ;0 :
 
/ 
∑
N 
O.

"

∑
F
O.

"

 
 

012003 45607 89 :60; :4 ;0 <
 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011 
9 
 
/ D 
∑
F 
O
"

P.".QRST
∑
F 
O
"

 
 
AB, C 

 
 
AB, C 
∑
F
O.

"

P.".QRSU,
QRVWST
∑
F
O.

"

P.".QRSU
 
If the current model is λ = (π, A, B, C) and the re-estimated model is JA  /, A, 
/, A then 
either the model λ is close enough to JA that both models can be considered identical at the local 
critical point, i.e. J  JA, or G!|JA X G!|J, which is proven by Baum [10].  With the new 
model and the re-estimated parameters, continue to iterate through the observations with their 
known outcomes until J  JA.  At this point, you will be in a local critical point which we will 
consider the best parameter estimates within this local area. 
 
To prove that the re-estimated equations are correctly derived, we can mathematically optimize 
the parameters in the likelihood function, P(O|λ), so that it is maximized with the observations 
with known outputs.  This is accomplished using Expectation Maximization (EM) techniques, 
very similar to [13], which computed the re-estimated parameters of /, / , and / =.  Following 
the same methods, the Baum Auxiliary Function is defined as HYJ, JAZ  ∑
GH  K|! 
[\\ ]
8, J · log GH  K, !  8|JA.  Since 
GH  K|!  8, J  GH  K, !  K|J
G!  8|J
 
and 
 
GYH  K, !  8aJAZ  /]
 ∏
/]"]"#

O.

"

∏
/]"c"
O
"

∏
A]"8, 8 ' 1
O.

"

) 
 
the log of this can separate out parts of the above equation: 
E8?GYH  K, !  KaJAZ
  E8?/]
 ' d E8?/]"]"#

O.

"

' d /]"c"
O
"

' d
A]"8, 8 ' 1
O.

"

 
 
where q(t) and q(t+1) are the states at time t and t+1, and o(t) and o(t+1) are the observation at 
time t and t+1. 
 
Now the Baum Auxiliary Function can be re-written as 
HYJ, JAZ  d eGH  K, !  K|J
G!  8|J
f · E8?/]
 ' d E8?/]"]"W
O.

"

' d /]"c"
O
"

[\\ ]
' d
A]"8, 8 ' 0
O.

"

 
Or simply 
 
HYJ, JAZ  HhJ, / ' H[J, / ' HiYJ, /Z ' HjJ, A 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011 
10 
 
 
where 
HhJ, /  d GH  K, !  8|J
G!  8|J
E8?/



 
H[J, /  d d d GK  :, !  8|J
G!  8|J
E8?/ 
O.

"


 




 
HiYJ, /Z  d d
d
GK  <, !  8|J
G!  8|J
E8?/ D
O
"

P" cRkT
l
D


 

 
HjJ, A  d d d
d
GK  :, !  8|J
G!  8|J
E8?A8, 8 ' 1            0K. 3
O.

"

P" cRSU
cRVWST
l
D

l
=




 
 
with the following constraints 
d 



 1 
d   1

 

 
              d  D  1
l
D

 987 EE < 
d B, C  1                                                             0K. 4
l
D

 
 
Lagrange multipliers can be used to solve for the estimated parameters of JA  Y/, /, /, AZ.  This 
has been solved of /, / , and / = in [13].  To solve for AB, C  the same techniques used to 
solve for the other parameters are used here.  Let ρ be the Lagrange multiplier.  Solving for 
HjJ, A, combine the constraint, equation 4, with the Lagrange multiplier and put with 
equation 3, differentiated and set to 0 for a solution; which is then put into the equations for the 
final solution of AB, C: 
 
o
oAB, C
p
q
q
q
q
r
d d d
d
sGK  :, !  8|J
G!  8|J
E8?AB, Ct
O
"
,
P" QRSU
QRVWST
l
D

l
=




' u vd B, C w 1
l
D

x
y
z
z
z
z
{
 0 
 
d
GK  :, !  8|J
G!  8|J
O
"
,
P" QRSU,
QRVWST
·
1
AB, C ' u  0 987 EE :, B, C 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011 
11 
 
 
 
AB, C  w
∑
GK  :, !  8|J
G!  8|J
O
"
,
P" QRSU,
QRVWST
u
 
 
Sub this into the constraint equation 4 to get 
u  w d
d
GK  :, !  8|J
G!  8|J
O
"
,
P" QRSU
QRVWST
l
D

 
 
The right part of this equation can be reduced by combining the summation together to get 
u  w
d
GK  :, !  8|J
G!  8|J
O
"
,
P" QRSU
 
Finally, AB, C can be written as 
AB, C 
∑
GK  :, !  8|J
O
"
,
P" QRSU
QRVWST
∑
GK  :, !  8|J
O
"
,
P" QRSU
 
 
which is the same as 
AB, C 
∑
F
O
"
,
P" QRSU
QRVWST
∑
F
O
"
,
P" QRSU
  
 
4. EXAMPLE 1: FISHER IRIS DATA OF EXAMPLE OF MESSY DATA 
 
4.1 Introduction to the Problem 
 
This chapter will discuss the application of the theory of Evidence Feed Forward HMMs to 
classify.  A great amount of thought on what type of data should be used to focus on the 
difference in Evidence Feed Forward HMMs and standard HMMs.  It has always been a 
problem with standard HMMs that errors in data give poor classification results.  The data 
provided here will be over-processed to a point where standard techniques to classify this data 
cannot be accomplished algorithmically or through human inspection.  Although there may be 
viewable patterns in the HMM input data, there will also be errors. 
 
At this point, the reader should come to the conclusion that Evidence Feed Forward HMMs 
should be pretty good at identifying visual data from people.  This is because with Evidence 
Feed Forward HMMs, the link between observation to observation gives insight into patterns of 
movement.  For example, if a baseball player is pitching a ball, the pitching arm is moving in 
generally the same direction for most of the action.  The linkage from observation to 
observation will identify continual motion better than standard HMMs, thus more probability 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011 
12 
 
will be associated with the trained data of pitching to increase probability in the motion of the 
pitching arm.  This will increase likelihood which will provide better results. 
 
However, video and image data of people are not the only category which will benefit from 
Evidence Feed Forward HMMs.  From the simple weather example presented earlier, it should 
be clear that the linkage of observation to observation will provide a means of increasing 
probability associated with the observations outside of the hidden states. 
 
The over-processed Fisher Iris data example will demonstrate the increased classification 
ability of Evidence Feed Forward HMMs in non-video/image data.  Although this may look 
like a stretch with relation of different data sets, it will be shown that there is some linkage and 
that Evidence Feed Forward HMMs provide a better means of classifying the over-processed 
data.  
 
The Fisher Iris Data [11] is a classical data set used throughout the image processing and 
pattern recognition communities as example data and test data for classification of algorithms.  
R.A. Fisher used this data in 1936 for pattern recognition.  It was originally gathered from an 
American botanist, Edgar Anderson in 1935. The data consists of a collection of sepal width, 
sepal length, petal width, and petal length of three types of Iris flowers, the Setosa, the 
Versicolour, and the Virginica.  150 data sets are provided with 50 of each Iris type.  One class 
is linearly separable from the others. 
 
Using this data will help show that the Evidence Feed Forward HMM works better than 
standard HMMs on more than just image and video data classifications.  For this data sets, the 
information will be over-processed to a point of non recognition visually through the human 
eyes.  That is, there will be no recognizing features when viewing this data visually.  The reason 
for over-processing the data is two-fold.  First, HMMs have inherently been bad at 
classification with messy data.  The over-processing of the data will make messy data.  Second, 
this data will show a better example of the increased capabilities of the Evidence Feed Forward 
HMM when compared with a standard HMM on the same data.  
 
4.2 Pre-processing of the Data 
 
The Fisher Iris data was imported from the University of California – Irvine Machine Learning 
Repository [11] which contains the original data with two fixes as described at the website.  
These fixes were errors in the data when originally used.  A plot of the petal length versus the 
petal width shows the Setosa class linearly separable from the other two classes, shown in 
Figure 3. 
 
After importing the data, each category was identified with the highest and lowest values.  
These values made up the end points for the class category.  For example, the petal length 
ranges from 1.0 cm to 6.9 cm, so the highest value is 6.9 and the lowest value is 1.0.  The value 
range decided the values associated with each bin.  A bin, in this case, is a value associated with 
a range of values from the data.  Ten bins were used.  For example, Petal Length has a range of 
5.9 cm (6.9 cm – 1.0 cm), thus each bin is split 0.59 cm wide.  Bin 1 holds the values from 1.0 
to 1.59.  Bin 2 holds the values of greater than 1.59 to 2.18, and so on.  The same holds true for 
all four categories. 
 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011 
13 
 
 
Figure 3:  Fisher Iris data plot of petal length versus petal width. 
 
After the bins were created, the new data was processed to find the trends from sepal length to 
sepal width, sepal width to petal length, and petal length to petal width.  That is, increase, 
decrease, or no change in bin values for each flower.  So, if sepal length had a higher bin value 
then sepal width then this would be viewed as a decrease.  If it was a lower bin value then it 
would be an increase.  If the bin values were the same, then no change is recorded.  This was 
done three times (sepal length to sepal width, sepal width to petal length, and petal length to 
petal width).  This is the inputs into the HMMs for comparison. 
 
4.3 Results and Analysis 
 
The data used for both training and testing of the Evidence Feed Forward HMM and the 
standard HMM is described above.  Both the Evidence Feed Forward HMM and the standard 
HMM models were set up to have three hidden nodes and three outputs.  More nodes were 
trained and tested with little to no changes in the results.  MatLAB was used to program both 
the Evidence Feed Forward HMM and the standard HMM.  Each HMM was trained with ten 
data items per flower grouping creating three separate HMMs, one for each Iris type.  Training 
was considered complete when a change in likelihood value of 0.01 or less was attained.  This 
was assumed a good value after several runs through the training and testing.  Values that were 
less than 0.01 took several more iterations to converge.  Values higher than 0.01 threshold 
converged quickly with worse results when testing the data.  From the remaining 120 pieces of 
data both the standard HMM and the Evidence Feed Forward HMM was tested by running the 
data through each of the three HMMs.  The highest likelihood was the winner. 
 
The results showed that for the standard HMM, the likelihood of correctly identifying the Iris 
category is 35%.  This number is very low and can normally be considered a guess since it is 
about one third correct classification on three possible categories.  However, after looking at the 
results one can see that it correctly categorized almost all the Setosa Iris data but almost none of 
the other two Iris types.  The Setosa Iris is nearly linearly separable in sepal length verse sepal 
width and in petal length versus petal width.  This gives a clue into why the Setosa category 
was almost completly categorized correctly. 
 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011 
14 
 
The Evidence Feed Forward HMM did much better in categorizing the over-processed Iris data.  
It correctly categorized 75% correctly.  This is probably because of the linkage between the 
observations (evidence).  Observations are the increase, decrease, or no change to the bins from 
sepal length to sepal width, sepal width to petal length, and petal length to petal width.  There 
seems to be more of a pattern when a bin value stays the same, increase, or decrease from one 
bin to another.  The bin changes are captured better by the Evidence Feed Forwards HMM than 
the standard HMM due to the observation to observation transition probability, as shown in the 
results. 
 
Although these classification rates are still poor when compared to other classifiers, one has to 
remember the type of data that these are trained and tested on as well as comparing the 
classifiers within their own category.  This data has been over processed and thus, very messy.  
There are no visual recognizable patterns that stand out in this pre-processed data.  
 
HMMs are notorious for being poor classifiers with messy data.  This is shown with the 
standard HMM on this data, only correctly classifying 35% correctly.  However, the Evidence 
Feed Forward HMM has given much better results, classifying 75% correctly.  This better 
classification rate than standard HMMs is due to the linkage in Evidence Feed Forward 
Observations which is not present in standard HMMs. 
 
5. EXAMPLE 2: VIDEO ACTION RECOGNITION WITH SPARSE MESSY DATA 
 
5.1 Introduction to the Problem 
 
The video action recognition data used is from a popular source which created this data to be 
used to improve people’s action classification algorithms on visual data.  The database comes 
from Carnegie Melon University (CMU) Graphics Lab and can be found at [12].  For this 
example, the simulated data on jumping, running (jogging), dribbling a basketball, and soccer 
kick was used.  Like the Fisher Iris data, this data was over processed to better show the reader 
the ability to classify with sparse messy data; sparse data because in some cases there where 
only a handful of action sequences to test and train on.   
 
The CMU data was captured as a sequence of simulated people singled out to perform an 
activity.  Each simulated action is performed different between the groups.  The starting and 
stopping frames are different as is the way the activity is performed.  For example, comparing 
two running sequences, one may take a longer stride than the other or arm movements may 
have different frequencies. 
 
This data was processed so that the hands, arms, and head can be tracked.  It was over 
processed to a point where one could say it is unusable.  This was to show the strength of 
Evidence Feed Forward HMMs compared to other HMMs.  The hands, feet and head location 
were often misclassified which produced large, abnormal movements with hands, head, and/or 
feet.   
 
5.2 Pre-processing the Data 
 
This data was easier to process then real data since there is no background information that 
needed to be segmented out or tracking of colors.  Like many image processing exercises, the 
more processing that is done to an image, the more likely that the image is no longer a good 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011 
15 
 
representative of the items you are trying to find.  In this case, we are trying to find links 
between frames to represent actions.   
 
The determination of the edges of the body was by threshold analysis.  If the grayscale image of 
the body was below a threshold, then it was considered not to be part of the body.  As images 
are taken, there is usually a mixing of colors from the edges of the body to the background.  
This mixture is removed using thresholding.  If thresholding was not used then the edges of the 
image would be very rough and virtual impossible to perform some of our data processing 
techniques to it.  The thresholding produced a binary image. 
 
Next the binary image of each frame was skeletonized.  That is, the area representing the image 
was thinned to a point where only a single line represented the body parts.  This made it easier 
to identify the tips of the hands, feet, and head through the endpoints of skeletal image frame.  
If a point in the image frame had only one neighbor, then it was considered an endpoint.  Often 
times, the skeletonization process thins the image to much where several end points other than 
the tips of the hands, feet, and head are found.  This creates extra points in the image. 
 
To reduce the number of extra points, another process is performed to find the location of the 
last points and keep all points that are within a certain distance from them.  This distance must 
be greater than the pre-determined distance otherwise it is considered part of the point.  This 
alleviates some of the problems with multiple points, but not all of them.  So, only the five 
points which best represent the last five points are kept.   
 
Looping of an endpoint occurs from the thresholding process, which the skeletonization process 
exploits.  When a loop occurs, there is no endpoint since all points in the looped area have more 
than one neighbor.  This eliminates key endpoints.  To add the end points back in, a close 
representative of the point is used.  It keeps the location of the last point which was missing and 
assumes the change is negligible.  As one can imagine, this may cause some problems with the 
classification since changes are important with Evidence Feed Forward HMMs.  When 
automating the pre-processing phase of the image sequences, this problem occurs often, so no 
measures are made to manually reduce it.  The idea is to have some uniformity in the pre-
processing as well as the classification. 
 
The worst of these errors happen when a point is missing in one frame and then shows up as 
extra points in the others.  Often times the skeletonization process produces lines where none 
should exist and creates loops where there should exist a single line, all in the same image 
frame.  In this case, it may have found the five points it was looking for, but not the correct 
ones. This error is propagated into the classification algorithm as well as in the pre-processing 
procedure since it uses the previous frame as a template to where the points should be.   
 
Without all the image processing errors, this would be a viable way to find activities of the 
people.  The hands, feet, and head location would probably be tracked and with enough data, 
the classification algorithm would utilize all the position information.  However, at this point it 
should be noted that first, this is not an image processing research project.  The errors in the 
pre-processing are common and with a greater amount of time many may be alleviated.  
However, to demonstrate the robustness due to errors in Evidence Feed Forward HMMs versus 
standard HMMs, these types of errors will not be removed. 
 
To continue along with the pre-processing of this data, the five points are feed into another 
processing step which is meant to find and track the changes in the position of the points in 
relation to each other.  The five points will make up a bounding box which all five points are 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011 
16 
 
either on the edge of the box or inside.  Bounding boxes are often used in pedestrian detection 
to encompass the entire pedestrian within the box.  This process is similar except that it only 
encompasses the hands, feet, and head.  If you can imagine a person standing sideways with 
hands out, the box would be thinner than if a person is standing facing forward with hands to 
their sides and feet spread apart.  These differences are what we are looking for. 
 
The height/width ratio is found by taking the height and dividing by the width.  This method is 
sometimes used as a simple way of determining body position from crouching to standing, 
however in this case, only hands, feet, and head are used to create the bounding box where 
usually the entire body is used to create the bounding box. 
 
The height/width ratio for each frame in the sequence of images is put into one of eleven groups 
based on the value of the ratio.  Group 1 is if the ratio is below 0.1, group 2 is for the ratio to be 
between 0.1 and 0.2, and so on to group 11 which is above 1.0.  It is assumed that the hands, 
feet, and head would be changing throughout the activity and these changes can be tracked to 
produce a similar activity representation per individual.  In reality, this simplifies the activity 
and would be true if this was applied to a single person’s way of performing the activity.  
However, everyone has a relatively unique body position at each stage of the activity.  This 
over simplification of the activity is part of the over-processing which is often a problem with 
many classifiers.  
 
The final step of pre-processing is to track and record these changes in groups from frame to 
frame.  If a frame changes to a higher group then the previous frame then it is considered an 
INCREASE, if it is lower than it is a DECREASE.  If there is no change in grouping then it is 
considered NO CHANGE.  This creates a way of tracking the changes from frame to frame for 
input into the HMMs.  However, this process does not track the magnitude of the change which 
might also be important.  The idea is to keep the data simple and  represent the output in our 
HMMs.  If the observation data was more complicated, i.e. more values associated with it, then 
the training data would need to be increased to cover all the possible options of the observation 
data.   
 
The pre-processed data represents the evidence, or observations, for our HMMs.  The evidence 
is the input into the HMMs for both training and testing.  The number of frames per activity 
varies greatly, anywhere from 20 to 120 frames per activity. it was decided that the likelihood 
of each testing activity would be compared and the greatest likelihood would be the class it 
represented. 
 
5.3 Results and Analysis 
 
Of the four classes, there are a total of 64 activities modeled by the simulated sequences.  17 of 
these activities are jumping, 28 are jogging/running, 7 are soccer kicking, and 12 are dribbling a 
basketball.  The dribbling a basket ball had 9 from the right hand and 3 from the left.  From 
each group, except for soccer kicking, four 
random activities were used as training the Evidence Feed Forward HMM and the standard 
HMM.  Three were taken for soccer kicking because the sample was very small.  These training 
activities were the same for training both HMMs.  The training and testing of the Evidence 
Feed Forward HMM and the standard HMM were programmed in MatLAB. 
 
A total of 3 nodes were used in the hidden layer.  More were tried, but did not increase the 
classification rate.  With less nodes, the classification rates were worse, so three nodes were 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011 
17 
 
optimal on our testing/training samples.  Also, from earlier, three input values are used as the 
evidence which roughly represented the change in body position from frame to frame 
(INCREASE, DECREASE, and NO CHANGE).  The training was considered complete when 
the threshold changes of the previous HMM log-likelihood and the new HMM log-likelihood 
with updated parameters were less than 0.25.  Many different thresholds where tried with 0.25 
being the optimal one.  With a lower threshold, the training took a long time to converge on a 
solution for many of the activities.  This usually means over-training and as a result the testing 
data was classified correctly at a worse rate than with a threshold of 0.25.  When increasing the 
threshold above 0.25, the training converged very quickly and the results were also not as good 
when the testing data was applied.  This is indicative of under training. A threshold change 
value of 0.25 was considered optimal. 
 
For the standard Hidden Markov Model, it correctly classified 67% of the jump activity, 21% of 
the jogging activity, 50% of the soccer kick activity, and 12.5% of the dribbling activity.  See 
Table 1 below.  The Evidence Feed Forward HMM correctly identified 78% of the jump 
activity, 46% of the jogging activity, 100% of the soccer kick activity, and 50% of the dribbling 
activity. 
 
Notice that in all cases, the Evidence Feed Forward HMM did better than the standard HMM on 
this data.  This is because, even though the data is sparse and it was over processed, the 
Evidence Feed Forward HMM was still able to pick up some of the patterns that recognized the 
activity due to its ability to increase predictions based on previous observations.  That is, the 
observation to observation link in the Evidence Feed Forward HMM provides the ability to 
increase the overall probability of an activity’s pattern, and thus increase the classification rate.   
 
 
Table 1. 
Classification rates of HMM and Evidence Feed Forward HMM. 
Activity 
HMM 
EFF-HMM 
Jump
67 
78 
Jogging
21 
46 
Soccer kick
50 
100 
Dribbling a basketball
12.5 
50 
 
To further improve on the analysis one must first look at how the data is perceived to the 
classifier.  For the jumping data, one can imagine the ratio starting small, getting bigger as the 
person crouches to jump, then getting small again when the person stretch through the jump.  
The patterns of the groupings should be decreasing for a while then increasing.  For running, 
the arms stretch out around the time the legs stretch out and they come together as the legs 
come together.  Therefore, one would expect, depending on the starting phase of the sequence 
simulating running, the bounding box ratio would be small (arms and legs together) then 
increasing until a certain point (when the arms and legs are at their peak) then decreasing.  This 
is similar to the jumping and it is noted  that many of the misclassified activities of jogging 
were classified as jumping.   
 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011 
18 
 
For the dribbling a basketball activity, one would expect that the bounding boxes would be 
pretty much the same throughout.  As the person walks, the dribbling hand continues up and 
down at the same position but with further analysis, it shows that some of the simulations move 
their opposite arm similar to walking which makes the bounding box increase and decrease, 
thus the changes in the bounding box ratio will also increase and decrease in a similar fashion 
to jogging and jumping. 
 
Soccer kicking was a bit different than the rest of the activities.  As the player lines up towards 
the ball the legs come together.  Further into the sequence the right arm extends out as the 
kicking process is started.  Next the leg extends out.  Most of the bounding box ratio from 
frame to frame is increasing.  This is easy for the soccer kicking to classify correctly.  However, 
some of the Jogging activity also was classified as soccer kicking.  This is because the way the 
running simulation in these four people had a large amount of increasing which better 
associated with soccer kicking then with running. 
 
These results not only shows why some of the activities were misclassified, but also shows the 
problem with over-processed data.  Since there are no real distinguishing features that are 
indicative to the activity, many of the activities were classified with similar events as far as 
their data representation is concerned. 
 
The Evidence Feed Forward HMM did much better than the standard HMM in this sparse, 
over-processed data.  This is due to the linkage of observations to observations.  Even though 
there were no visible patterns associated with the activity, the Evidence Feed Forward HMM 
showed that fairly good classification could still be accomplished when compared to standard 
HMM classification. 
 
6. CONCLUSION 
 
The Evidence Feed Forward Hidden Markov Model is more than a standard Hidden Markov 
Model.  It provides observation to observation linkage in the algorithm.  The linkages were 
developed through analysis and proven mathematically.  It was originally designed for better 
classification of visual action data, like the differences in pitching and throwing from the 
outfield.  The idea is that if there existed a way to link one observation frame to another, then 
there may be some patterns that the Evidence Feed Forward HMM could recognize better than 
if there were no observation linkages, like how a standard HMM would classify.  This was 
extended for more than just visual data and has shown to work in other classification areas. 
 
The proposed research on the development of the Evidence Feed Forward HMM has worked 
well for classifications of items based on the observation to observation link that is not 
available in other types of HMMs.  With messy data, it has outperformed the standard HMM in 
classification of the Iris data.  With sparse messy data it has outperformed classification on 
visual activities created by simulated actions from the CMU data set.  This dataset was over-
processed to a point where no visual cues were seen.   
 
The mathematical proofs, results, and analysis of the Evidence Feed Forward HMM has added 
a new type of classifier and a new way of thinking about how the data should be viewed.  
Observation to observation linkages are essential, especially for visual data, if a more complete 
classification system is to be developed.   
 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011 
19
