arXiv:1401.7463v1  [cs.AI]  29 Jan 2014
Propagators and Violation Functions for
Geometric and Workload Constraints
Arising in Airspace Sectorisation ∗
Pierre Flener and Justin Pearson
Department of Information Technology
Uppsala University, Box 337, SE – 751 05 Uppsala, Sweden

Revision of 29 January 2014
Abstract
Airspace sectorisation provides a partition of a given airspace into sectors, subject
to geometric constraints and workload constraints, so that some cost metric is
minimised. We make a study of the constraints that arise in airspace sectorisation.
For each constraint, we give an analysis of what algorithms and properties are
required under systematic search and stochastic local search.
1
Introduction
We continue our work in [11, 12] on applying constraint programming (see Section 3)
to airspace sectorisation (see Section 2). In that work, we used existing constraints or
implemented new ones in an ad hoc fashion just to solve the problem at hand, without
much theoretical analysis of the constraints and their underlying algorithms.
We give a complete theoretical analysis of constraints that arise in airspace sectori-
sation. For each constraint, we analyse what propagation is possible under systematic
search. Under stochastic local search, we give eﬃcient algorithms for maintaining con-
straint and variable violations, as well as eﬃcient algorithms for probing the eﬀect of
local search moves; such algorithms are necessary if stochastic local search is to be done
eﬃciently.
The remainder of this report is structured as follows. Towards making it self-contained,
we ﬁrst give in Section 2 a brief overview on airspace sectorisation, and in Section 3 a
brief tutorial on constraint programming, especially about its core concept: a constraint
is a reusable software component that can be used declaratively, when modelling a com-
binatorial problem, and procedurally, when solving the problem. Experts on airspace
∗This work has been co-ﬁnanced by the European Organisation for the Safety of Air Navigation
(EUROCONTROL) under its Research Grants programme (contract 08-1214447-C). The content of the
work does not necessarily reﬂect the oﬃcial position of EUROCONTROL on the matter.
1

sectorisation or CP may safely skip these sections. Next, in Section 4, we lay the mathe-
matical foundation for specifying, in Section 5, the constraints identiﬁed above to occur
commonly in airspace sectorisation problems Finally, in Section 6, we summarise our
contributions and identify avenues for future work.
2
Background: Airspace Sectorisation
Airspace sectorisation provides a partition of a given airspace into a given (or upper-
bounded, or minimal) number of control sectors, subject to geometric constraints and
workload constraints, so that some cost metric is minimised. The entire material of this
section is a suitably condensed version of Section 2 of our report [6], where we have
surveyed the algorithmic aspects of methods for automatic airspace sectorisation, for an
intended readership of experts on air traﬃc management.
In this report, we focus on region-based models of airspace sectorisation, where the
airspace is initially partitioned into some kind of regions that are smaller than the tar-
geted sectors, so that the combinatorial problem of partitioning these regions in principle
needs no geometric post-processing step. Sectorisation then starts from regions of (any
combination of) the following granularities: a mesh of blocks of the same size and shape;
ATC functional blocks (AFBs); elementary sectors, namely the ones of the existing sec-
torisation; control sectors; areas of specialisation (AOS); and air traﬃc control centres
(ATCC).
We assume in this report that the airspace sectorisation is computed in three dimen-
sions, hence the ideas scale down to two dimensions. For simplifying the discussion, we
assume without loss of generality in this report that the number of sectors is a given
constant, rather than upper-bounded or to be minimised.
Airspace sectorisation aims at satisfying some constraints. The following constraints
have been found in the literature, so that a subset thereof is chosen for a given tool:
• Balanced workload: The workload of each sector must be within some given imbal-
ance factor of the average across all sectors.
• Bounded workload: The workload of each sector must not exceed some upper bound.
• Balanced size: The size of each sector must be within some given imbalance factor
of the average across all sectors.
• Minimum dwell time: Every ﬂight entering a sector must stay within it for a given
minimum amount of time (say two minutes), so that the coordination work pays
oﬀand that conﬂict management is possible.
• Minimum distance: Each existing trajectory must be inside each sector by a mini-
mum distance (say ten nautical miles), so that conﬂict management is entirely local
to sectors.
• Convexity of the sectors. Convexity can be in the usual geometric sense, or trajectory-
based (no ﬂight enters the same sector more than once), or more complex.
2

• Connectedness: A sector must be a contiguous portion of airspace and can thus not
be fragmented into a union of unconnected portions of airspace.
• Compactness: A sector must have a geometric shape that is easy to keep in mind.
• Non-jagged boundaries: A sector must have a boundary that is not too jagged.
For each sector, there are three kinds of workload: the monitoring workload, the conﬂict
workload, and the coordination workload; the ﬁrst two workloads occur inside the sector,
and the third one between the sector and an adjacent sector. The quantitative deﬁnition
of workload varies strongly between papers.
Airspace sectorisation often aims at minimising some cost. The following costs have
been found in the literature, so that a subset thereof is combined into the cost function
for a given tool, the subset being empty if sectorisation is not seen as an optimisation
problem:
• Coordination cost: The cost of the total coordination workload between the sectors
must be minimised.
• Transition cost: The cost of switching from the old sectorisation to the new one
must be minimised.
• Workload imbalance: The imbalance between the workload of the sectors must be
minimised.
• Number of sectors: The number of sectors must be minimised.
• Entry points: The total number of entry points into the sectors must be minimised.
• If any of the constraints above is soft, then there is the additional cost of minimising
the number of violations of soft constraints.
Constraints are to be satisﬁed, hence the existence or not of a cost function whose value
is to be optimised does not aﬀect the design of a constraint, in the sense discussed in the
following section. Hence we will no further discuss cost functions in this report.
3
Background: Constraint Programming
First, we show how to model combinatorial problems at a very high level of abstraction
with the help of the declarative notion of constraint (Section 3.1). One distinguishes
between satisfaction problems, where there is no objective function, and optimisation
problems, where there is an objective function. Then, we describe two methods for solving
combinatorial problems by a mixture of inference and search, upon reusing algorithms
that implement these constraints (Section 3.2). The entire material of this section is a
condensed version of our tutorial in Section 2 of [2].
3

▼
13❅
❅
▼
37❅
❅
▼
41❅
❅
▼
7❅
❅
4 ◮
❅
❅
14 ◮
❅
❅
16 ◮
❅
❅
▼
20
3 ◮
❅
❅
11 ◮
❅
❅
23 ◮
❅
❅
▼
3
29 ◮
❅
❅
11 ◮
❅
❅
6 ◮
❅
❅
5 ◮
❅
❅
7 ◮
❅
❅
❅
❅
❅
❅
❅
❅
❅
❅
❅
❅.3
1 ❅
❅8
6
❅
❅9
.7 ❅
❅2
1
❅
❅1
2
3
5
❅
❅6
.8
9
❅
❅8
9
7
5
❅
❅2
9 ❅
❅.4
2
❅
❅1
4 ❅
❅6
1
Figure 1: A Kakuro puzzle (on the left) and its solution (on the right), both taken from
the crossword package for LATEX by Gerd Neugebauer at CTAN.org.
3.1
Problem Modelling via Constraints
Constraint programming (CP) is a successful approach to the modelling and solving
of combinatorial problems. Its core idea is to capture islands of structure, also called
combinatorial sub-structures, that are commonly occurring within such problems and to
encapsulate declaratively their procedural inference algorithms by designing specialised
reusable software components, called constraints.
As a running example, let us consider the Kakuro puzzle, with the caveat that this
is not meant to imply that the discussed techniques are limited to (small) puzzles. See
the left side of Figure 1: Each word of a Kakuro puzzle is made of non-zero digits, under
the two constraints that the letters of each word are pairwise distinct and add up to
the number to the left (for horizontal words) or on top (for vertical words) of the word.
Hence there is one decision variable for each letter of the puzzle, with the integer set
{1, 2, . . . , 9} as domain. This is a satisfaction problem, as there is no objective function.
The solution to this puzzle is given on the right side of Figure 1; note that a Kakuro
puzzle is always designed so as to have a unique solution.
Beside the usual binary comparison constraints (<, ≤, =, ̸=, ≥, >), with arguments
involving the usual binary arithmetic operators (+, −, ·, etc), a large number of com-
binatorial constraints (usually called global constraints in the literature), involving more
complex structures and a non-ﬁxed number of arguments, have been identiﬁed.
For example, the AllDifferent({x1, . . . , xn}) constraint requires its n decision vari-
ables xi to take pairwise diﬀerent values. This constraint is useful in many challenging
real-life problems, as well as for modelling the ﬁrst constraint of the Kakuro puzzle, as
there is an AllDifferent constraint on each word. Each such constraint wraps a con-
junction of n·(n−1)
2
binary xi ̸= xj constraints into a single n-ary constraint; this enables
a more global view of the structure of the problem, which is a prerequisite for solving it
eﬃciently (as we shall see in Section 3.2).
As another example, the Linear({x1, . . . , xn} , RelOp, c) constraint requires the sum
x1 + · · · + xn of the n decision variables xi to be in relation RelOp with the constant c.
4

This constraint can be used for modelling the second constraint of the Kakuro puzzle, as
there is a Linear({x1, . . . , xn} , =, s) constraint for each word [x1, . . . , xn] with required
sum s. The generalised constraint Linear([a1, . . . , an] , [x1, . . . , xn] , RelOp, c) requires
the weighted sum a1 · x1 + · · · + an · xn of the n decision variables xi to be in relation
RelOp with the constant c, where the weights ai are constants.
Hundreds of useful constraints have been identiﬁed and are described in the Global
Constraint Catalogue [4], the most famous ones being element [20], cumulative [1],
alldifferent [17], and cardinality [18].
Constraints can be combined to model a combinatorial problem in a declarative and
very high-level fashion. For example, the Kakuro puzzle can essentially be modelled as
follows, assuming that a hint for word w with required sum s is encoded as the pair ⟨w, s⟩:
for each hint ⟨[x1, . . . , xn] , s⟩:
AllDifferent({x1, . . . , xn}) ∧Linear({x1, . . . , xn} , =, s)
(1)
For combinatorial problems, CP is not limited to decision variables whose domains are
ﬁnite sets of integers. For instance, domains can be ﬁnite sets of ﬁnite sets of integers,
and we then speak of set decision variables and set constraints. We call universe the
union of the sets in the domain of a set decision variable; the set value eventually taken
by a decision set variable is then a subset of the universe.
In the following sub-section, we show that constraints are not just a convenience for
high-level modelling, but can also be exploited during the solution process.
3.2
Problem Solving by Inference and Search
By intelligent search, we mean search where at least some form of inference takes place
at every step of the search in order to reduce the cost of brute-force search [9]:
combinatorial problem solving = search + inference + · · ·
In the following, we discuss two CP ways of solving problems that have been modelled
using constraints. The classical approach is to perform systematic search (Section 3.2.1),
and a more recent approach is to trade for time the guarantees of systematic search by
performing stochastic local search (Section 3.2.2): the two approaches use completely dif-
ferent forms of inference, which is encapsulated in reusable fashion within the constraints
(Section 3.2.3).
3.2.1
Systematic Search
Classically, CP solves combinatorial problems by systematic tree search, together with
backtracking, and performs at every node of the search tree a particular kind of inference
called propagation. For the purpose of this report, we only need to explain the propagation
of a single constraint here: we refer to [2] for how to propagate multiple constraints and
how systematic search is conducted.
For each individual constraint, a propagation algorithm (or propagator) prunes the do-
mains of its decision variables by eliminating impossible values according to some desired
level of consistency. For example, under domain consistency (DC) every domain value
of every decision variable participates in some solution to the constraint that involves
5

domain values of the other decision variables. Also, under bound consistency (BC) every
domain bound of every decision variable participates in some solution to the constraint
that involves domain values of the other decision variables.
For example, consider the constraint AllDifferent({x, y, z}). Let x, y range over
the domain {1, 3} and z over {1, 2, 3, 4}: we write dom(x) = dom(y) = {1, 3} and
dom(z) = {1, 2, 3, 4} and denote this state by {x, y 7→{1, 3} , z 7→{1, 2, 3, 4}}. From this
state, propagation to DC leads to the state {x, y 7→{1, 3} , z 7→{2, 4}} since x and y
must split the values 1 and 3 between themselves so that z cannot take any of these
two values. From the same start state {x, y 7→{1, 3} , z 7→{1, 2, 3, 4}}, propagation to
BC leads to the state {x, y 7→{1, 3} , z 7→{2, 3, 4}} since there do exist solutions to the
constraint where z takes its new lower bound value 2 or its old (and new) upper bound
value 4, so that the unfeasibility of the intermediate value 3 is not even checked. Note
that, in this case, the resulting DC state is strictly stronger than the resulting BC state:
while the initial state encodes a set of 2 · 2 · 4 = 16 candidate solutions, the BC state
encodes a subset thereof with 2 · 2 · 3 = 12 candidate solutions, and the DC state encodes
a subset of both with only 2·2·2 = 8 candidate solutions, including the 4 solutions. From
a second start state {x, y, z 7→{1, 2}}, propagation to DC or BC leads to the propagator
signalling failure, because it is impossible to assign two values to three variables so that
the latter are pairwise distinct. From a third start state {x 7→{1} , y 7→{3} , z 7→{2, 4}},
propagation to DC or BC leads to no propagation, but the propagator can simultaneously
detect that all 1·1·2 = 2 candidate solutions actually are solutions, so that the propagator
can signal subsumption (or entailment).
The propagation of a constraint amounts to reasoning with possible domain values,
but there is no obligation to prune all the impossible domain values, as just witnessed
when comparing DC and BC. If a constraint has multiple propagators achieving diﬀerent
strengths of consistency (under diﬀerent time complexities), then there is a default prop-
agator but the modeller may also choose one of them, possibly via experiments to ﬁnd
out which one leads to the best trade-oﬀin search eﬀort; this is the ﬁrst non-declarative
annotation that may be added to an otherwise declarative constraint model (and we will
encounter a second one below). Also, the propagator of a constraint only reasons locally,
namely about the decision variables of that constraint, rather than globally, about all the
decision variables of the entire problem.
3.2.2
Stochastic Local Search
Systematic search (as just described) explores the whole search space, though not by
explicitly trying all possible combinations of domain values for the decision variables, but
implicitly thanks to the interleaving of search with inference. Suitable values are found
one-by-one for the decision variables. Systematic search oﬀers the guarantee of eventually
ﬁnding a solution (or ﬁnding and proving an optimal solution, in the case of an optimi-
sation problem), if one exists, and proving unsatisﬁability otherwise. However, this may
take too long and it may be more interesting in some situations to ﬁnd quickly solutions
that may violate some constraints (or may be sub-optimal). The idea of stochastic local
search (SLS; see [10], for example) is to trade this guarantee for speed by not exploring
the whole search space. Unsatisﬁability of the constraints is a priori not detectable by
SLS, and optimality of solutions is a priori not provable by SLS.
6

SLS starts from a possibly random assignment of domain values to all the decision
variables, without concern for whether some constraints are violated. It then tries to
ﬁnd a better assignment (in the sense of violating fewer constraints, or violating some
constraints less, or yielding a better value of the objective function) by changing the
values of a few decision variables, upon probing the impacts of many such small changes,
which are called moves, and then actually selecting and making one of these moves. The
set of candidate moves is called the neighbourhood. This iterates, under suitable heuristics
and meta-heuristics, until a suﬃciently good assignment has been found, or until some
allocated resource (such as running time or a number of iterations) has been exhausted.
SLS is an area of intensive research on its own, but the CP concept of constraint
can be usefully imported into SLS, giving rise to what is known as constraint-based local
search (CBLS; see [21] for example). In principle, the declarative part of a constraint
model is thus the same as when solving the problem by classical CP (by systematic tree
search interleaved with propagation). The inference counterpart of the propagator of a
constraint are its violation functions and its diﬀerentiation functions, discussed next. For
the purpose of this report, we only need to explain these functions for a single constraint
here: we refer to [2] for how to evaluate them for multiple constraints and how stochastic
local search is conducted.
For each individual constraint, the following functions are required in a CBLS system:
• The constraint violation function gives a measure of how much the constraint is
violated under the current assignment. It must be zero if and only if the constraint
is satisﬁed, and positive otherwise.
• The variable violation function gives a measure of how much a suitable change of
a given decision variable may decrease the constraint violation.
• The assignment delta function gives the exact or approximated increase in con-
straint violation upon a probed x := d assignment move for decision variable x and
domain value d.
• The swap delta function gives the exact or approximated increase in constraint
violation upon a probed x :=: y swap move between two decision variables x and
y.
A constraint or decision variable with higher violation is a stronger candidate for repair by
a move. A negative delta reﬂects a decrease in constraint violation, hence smaller deltas
identify better moves. Diﬀerentiation functions for other kinds of moves, such as multiple
assignments, can be added. Ideally, violations are updated incrementally in constant time
upon the actual making of a move, but this is not always possible. Similarly, deltas are
ideally computed diﬀerentially in constant time rather than by subtracting the constraint
violations after and before the probed move.
For example, consider the constraint AllDifferent({v, w, x, y, z}). Under the as-
signment {v 7→4, w 7→4, x 7→5, y 7→5, z 7→5}, the constraint violation could be 3, be-
cause three variables need to take a suitable new value in order to satisfy the constraint,
and the variable violation of y could be 1, because the constraint violation would decrease
by one if y were assigned a suitable new value, such as 6. Upon the assignment moves
y := 4 and y := 6, the constraint violation increases by 0 and −1, respectively, so the
7

latter probed move is better. Upon any swap move, the constraint violation increases by
0. When maintaining for every domain value the number of variables currently taking it,
the violations can be updated in constant time upon an actual move, and the deltas can
be computed in constant time for a probed move.
A neighbourhood can often be designed so that some constraints of the model remain
satisﬁed if they are satisﬁed under the starting assignment. Such constraints are called
implicit constraints, since they need not be given in the constraint model, whereas the
constraints to be satisﬁed through search are called explicit constraints and must be
given in the constraint model. Since the explicit constraints can be violated under the
current assignment, they are often called soft constraints. Conversely, since the implicit
constraints can never be violated, they are often called hard constraints.
For example, in a Sudoku puzzle, there is an AllDifferent constraint on each of
the nine rows, columns, and 3 × 3 blocks: the row AllDifferent constraints can be
made implicit upon using a neighbourhood with swap moves inside rows, since these
constraints can be satisﬁed under the starting assignment (obtained by generating nine
random permutations of the sequence [1, 2, . . . , 9]) and remain satisﬁed upon swap moves.
3.2.3
Conclusion about Search and the Role of Constraints in Search
Both in constraint-based systematic search and in constraint-based local search, a prob-
lem solver software (or simply: solver) need only provide the master search algorithm,
as well as implementations of the built-in (meta-)heuristics and constraints that are used
in the problem model. The modeller is free to design custom (meta-)heuristics and con-
straints. A constraint fully declaratively encapsulates inference algorithms (propagators
or violation functions and delta functions), which have been written once and for all and
are invoked by the master search algorithm and the (meta-)heuristics in order to conduct
the search for solutions.
The usage of constraints achieves code reusability. It also entails a clean separation
between the declarative and non-declarative parts of the problem model (which together
form the input to the solver), as well as a clean separation between search and inference
within the solver itself. The slogan of constraint programming is:
constraint program = model + search
because we also have more code modularity.
4
Mathematical Formulation
We consider two models of airspace sectorisation: one model uses a decision variable per
region, its domain being the set of sectors; the other model uses a set decision variable per
sector, its universe being the set of regions. A third approach is to consider both models
at the same time, and add channelling constraints between them that ensure the two
models are consistent. All work we surveyed in [6] has been done on the ﬁrst approach,
as the set variable approach might be unrealistic because the sets could get too large
for current CP solvers. We refer to the ﬁrst model as the graph colouring approach, and
to the second model as the set covering approach. In both models, there is the same
background data:
8

1. A given set Regions of regions, where each region is uniquely identiﬁed.
2. For each region, there is a given workload value, or, if there is more than one type
of workload, a tuple of workload values. The set of possible (tuples of) workload
values is denoted by Workloads. The workload of each region is given by a function
Workload: Regions →Workloads.
3. A function C that takes a set of regions and returns the combined workload for that
set considered as a sector.
4. Each ﬂight is given as the sequence of regions it visits, together with entry and exit
time stamps.
5. The background geometry is given as a graph.
In most work, the background geometry was handled implicitly in the deﬁnitions of the
constraints, while workload and ﬂight were given as parameters to the model.
There are three diﬀerent types of workload: monitoring workload, conﬂict workload,
and coordination workload. If all three types of workload are considered, then the set
Workloads is the Cartesian product N×N×N, without loss of generality. In our previous
work [11, 12], we ignored coordination workload and combined monitoring and conﬂict
workload into a single integer: the set Workloads was N.
In general, the function C performs an addition or a weighted sum. It gets complicated
when coordination workload is taken into account, because the coordination between two
regions of the same sector need not be taken into account, so that coordination workload
is not additive.
In what follows, we shall leave the handling of the aggregation of coordination work-
load as future work. We assume that the workload of a region is given as single integer,
and that the workload combination function C sums up the workloads of the regions in
a region set R constituting a sector, that is:
C(R) =
X
r∈R
Workload(r)
4.1
Background Geometry
We assume that the airspace is divided into a countable number of regions. These regions
can be any shape with ﬂat sides, that is polytopes. What is important is that we have
a graph connecting adjacent regions.
In the following, for generality of purpose and
notation, we rename the set Regions into a vertex set V .
Formally, the background
geometry G induces an undirected graph
⟨V, E ⊆V × V ⟩
where E is a set of undirected edges. Given v ∈V , we deﬁne Adj(v) to be the set of
vertices that are adjacent to v:
Adj(v) = {w ∈V | ⟨v, w⟩∈E}
9

When considering constraints on the shape of sectors, we need access to the shape of
its constituent regions. In particular, if we are considering regions that are polytopes,
then each region has a number of lower-dimensional facets. In three dimensions, the
facets are two-dimensional surfaces, and in two dimensions, the facets are one-dimensional
lines. In algebraic topology [14], there is a very general theory of simplexes, which are
representations of geometric objects together with facets, and facets of facets, all the
way down until zero-dimensional points are reached. Although we do not need the full
machinery of algebraic topology, the formalisation given here is inspired by its standard
treatment [14].
Given a graph G = ⟨V, E ⊆V × V ⟩, a facet structure for G is a set of facets F and a
function ∂from vertices V to facets F. The facet function needs to satisfy the condition
that given any two adjacent vertices v and w (that is ⟨v, w⟩∈E), there is exactly one
facet f ∈F such that f ∈∂(v) and f ∈∂(w).
A facet f is a border facet if there is exactly one vertex v such that f ∈∂(v). A border
vertex is a vertex that has a border facet.
Given a graph G = ⟨VG, EG ⊆VG × VG⟩, we denote the set of border vertices of G by
BG. The enveloped graph of G, denoted by G⊥, is the graph
⟨VG ∪{⊥} , EG ∪({⊥} × BG) ∪(BG × {⊥})⟩
That is, there is a unique new vertex ⊥that is connected to all border vertices. The
extended facet function ∂⊥is deﬁned as
∂⊥(v) =
(
∂(v)
if v ̸= ⊥
{⊥f}
otherwise
Given a graph and a facet structure with facet function ∂, the extended facet function
satisﬁes the property that for any v ̸= ⊥and w ̸= ⊥there is exactly one facet f ∈F
such that f ∈∂⊥(v) and f ∈∂⊥(w).
Sometimes, we need to see a vertex set V as an ordered set:
• Let v ≺w denote that vertex v is to the left of vertex w in the vertex set V .
• Let v ⪯w denote that vertex v is to the left of vertex w in V , with possibly v = w.
• Let pred(v) denote the predecessor of vertex v in V ; if v is the leftmost vertex in
V , then pred(v) = ⊥.
• Similarly, let succ(v) denote the successor of vertex v in V , if any, else ⊥.
The vertex set V is seen as a sequence rather than as a set whenever we use the ≺or ⪯
relation to specify the semantics of a constraint.
It will sometimes be useful to have information about the volume of a region and the
surface area of a facet of a region. We assume that we are given two functions:
• Volume: V →N, such that Volume(r) returns the volume of region r.
• Area: V ×F →N, such that Area(r, f) returns the area of facet f or region r, with
f ∈∂(r). Technically, the region r is a redundant argument, but we keep it for
clarity.
We use the terminology of a 3D space. In a 2D space, the facet area would be a side
length, and the region volume would be a surface area.
10

4.2
Flight Data
We assume without loss of generality that time stamps are given as integers. A ﬂight
plan is a sequence of regions, each with an entry time stamp and an exit time stamp,
such that the times are increasing between entry and exit time stamps. Formally a ﬂight
plan p is a member of (V × N × N)∗such that if
p = [⟨v1, t1, t′
1⟩, ⟨v2, t2, t′
2⟩, . . . , ⟨vm, tm, t′
m⟩]
then for all 1 ≤i ≤m we have ti < t′
i, and for all 1 ≤i < m we have t′
i = ti+1. Note
that we require a strict inequality between entry and exit timestamps since aircraft have
a ﬁnite velocity. Let the ﬂight plan of ﬂight f be denoted by Plan(f).
4.3
The Graph Colouring Approach
Consider a graph G = ⟨V, E⟩. Let the given number of sectors be n. For each vertex
v in V , we create a decision variable Colour(v) with domain {1, . . . , n}. The goal is to
assign values to each decision variable such that we have a valid sectorisation. A solution
to such a constraint problem is a mapping Colour : V →{1, . . . , n}. We assume that
solving starts with the special vertex ⊥being given a colour not made available to the
vertices of G.
For stochastic local search, the current assignment α induces an undirected graph
ColourGraph with V as vertex set: there is an edge between vertices v and w if and only
if they are adjacent in G and have the same colour under α. Formally:
⟨v, w⟩∈ColourGraph ⇔⟨v, w⟩∈E ∧α(Colour(v)) = α(Colour(w))
(2)
Note that ColourGraph dynamically changes during search as α changes.
For systematic search, the current state induces an undirected graph ColourGraph
with V as vertex set: there is an edge between vertices v and w if and only if they
are adjacent in G and currently have non-disjoint domains, that is they may eventually
become part of the same connected component of ColourGraph. Formula (2) becomes:
⟨v, w⟩∈ColourGraph ⇔⟨v, w⟩∈E ∧dom(Colour(v)) ∩dom(Colour(w)) ̸= ∅
In a sequence, we call stretch a maximal sub-sequence whose elements are all equal.
For instance, the sequence [1, 1, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4, 1, 1, 1, 2] has four stretches, namely [1, 1],
[4, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4], [1, 1, 1], and [2]. A stretch in a sequence is the specialisation for a one-
dimensional geometry of the notion of connected component in ColourGraph. In the
formalisations of constraints in Section 5, we use the Stretch(X, ℓ, r) predicate, which
holds if and only if the sequence X has a stretch from index ℓto index r:
Stretch(X, ℓ, r) ⇔X[pred(ℓ)] ̸= X[ℓ] = X[r] ̸= X[succ(r)] ∧∀ℓ≺i ≺r : X[i] = X[ℓ]
where X is assumed to start and end with a unique value, and ℓand r are neither the
ﬁrst nor the last indices inside X.
11

4.4
The Set Covering Approach
Let the given number of sectors be n. We use n set decision variables S1, . . . , Sn, which
are to be assigned subsets of the universe set V . In addition to the other constraints in
the problem that restrict the assignments of S1, . . . , Sn to be valid sectors, we require
that all the sets be pairwise disjoint.
5
Geometric and Workload Constraints
We now consider the most important and most representative of the airspace sectorisation
constraints listed in Section 2. We encapsulate each as a constraint in the constraint pro-
gramming sense (as seen in Section 3.1), give its semantics, and design the encapsulated
inference algorithms, namely propagators for systematic search (as seen in Section 3.2.1),
as well as violation and diﬀerentiation functions for stochastic local search (as seen in
Section 3.2.2). It is important to keep in mind that these algorithms and functions are
designed in a problem-independent fashion, so as to make the constraints highly reusable.
We leave the set colouring approach as future work, and assume the graph colouring
approach for all the constraints:
• We consider a graph G with vertex set V and edge set E.
• We look for a mapping Colour : V →Colours, that is we create a colour decision
variable Colour(v) for every vertex v ∈V . Let Colours = S
v∈V dom(Colour(v))
be the set of available colours.
• Let Value be a sequence, indexed by V , of integer values.
The notation [φ] uses the Iverson bracket (typeset in red for the convenience of those view-
ing this document in colour) to represent the truth of formula φ, with truth represented
by 1 and falsity by 0.
5.1
Connectedness
The Connected(G, Colour, RelOp, N) constraint, with RelOp ∈{≤, <, =, ̸=, >, ≥},
holds if and only if the number of colours used in the sequence Colour is in relation
RelOp with N, and there is a path in the graph G = ⟨V, E⟩between any two vertices of
the same colour that only visits vertices of that colour. Formally:
|{Colour(v) | v ∈V }| RelOp N ∧
∀v, w ∈V : Colour(v) = Colour(w) ⇒⟨v, w⟩∈E∗
Colour(v)
(3)
where E∗
c denotes the transitive closure of Ec, which is the adjacency relation E projected
onto adjacency for vertices of colour c:
Ec = {⟨v, w⟩∈E | Colour(v) = c = Colour(w)}
Hence the total number of connected components in the induced graph ColourGraph
must be in relation RelOp with N, and the number of connected components per colour
must be at most 1.
12

Arbitrary Number of Dimensions.
The Connected(G, Colour, RelOp, N) con-
straint generalises the main aspect of the Connect Points(w, h, d, Colour, N) con-
straint of [4], which considers RelOp is “=” and considers G to be induced by a w ×h×d
cuboid divided into same-sized regions; further, there is a special colour (value 0) for
which there is no restriction on the number of connected components. An initial idea
for a propagator is outlined in [4]: we ﬂesh it out below and also give violation and
diﬀerentiation functions.
The constraint Connected is a hard constraint in our prior work on airspace sectori-
sation using stochastic local search [12], hence no violation and diﬀerentiation functions
are given there. A connectedness constraint was accidentally forgotten in our prior work
on airspace sectorisation using systematic search [11], hence no propagator is given there.
One Dimension.
The constraint Connected(G, Colour, RelOp, N) for a graph G in-
duced by a one-dimensional geometry (in which connected components are called stretches)
generalises the main aspect of the Multi Global Contiguity(Colour) constraint [4],
which itself generalises the Global Contiguity(Colour) constraint of [13]: the lat-
ter constrains only one colour (value 1) but the former constrains several colours, and
both lack the decision variable N and hence RelOp; further, both have a special colour
(value 0) for which there is no restriction on the number of stretches (there are at
most two such stretches when there is only one constrained colour). A propagator for
Global Contiguity is given in [13], and a decomposition based on the Automaton
constraint is given in [4]: we generalise these ideas below and also give violation and
diﬀerentiation functions.
The trajectory-based convexity of an airspace sectorisation is achieved by posting for
every ﬂight a Connected(G, Colour, ≤, s) constraint on the sequence Colour of decision
variables denoting the sequence of colours of its one-dimensional visited region sequence
V , where s is the imposed or maximum number of sectors. The initial domain of each
colour decision variable Colour(v) is {1, 2, . . . , s}.
Such a trajectory-based convexity constraint is called the Contiguity constraint
in our prior work on airspace sectorisation under systematic search [11], but lacks the
decision variable N and hence RelOp; further, the propagator outlined there prunes less
strongly than the one describe below (as it lacks both steps 2).
Such a trajectory-based convexity constraint is a soft constraint in our prior work on
airspace sectorisation under stochastic local search [12], but lacks the decision variable N
and hence RelOp; further, the constraint violation is deﬁned diﬀerently there (in a manner
that requires an asymptotically higher runtime to compute than the one we give below),
and the variable violation and diﬀerentiation functions are not given there (though they
are in the unpublished code underlying the experiments).
5.1.1
Violation and Diﬀerentiation Functions
The violation and diﬀerentiation functions described below have no asymptotically better
specialisation to the case of G being induced by a one-dimensional space. Hence they
apply to both connectedness in a space of an arbitrary number of dimensions and to
contiguity in a one-dimensional space.
13

Soft Constraint.
If the Connected constraint is considered explicitly, then we pro-
ceed as follows. For representing the induced graph ColourGraph, we show that it suﬃces
to initialise and maintain the following two data structures, which are internal to the con-
straint:
• Let NCC(c) denote the number of connected components (CCs) of ColourGraph
whose vertices currently have colour c.
• Let NCC denote the current number of connected components of ColourGraph:
NCC =
X
c∈Colours
NCC (c)
(4)
We can now re-formalise the semantics (3): the Connected(G, Colour, RelOp, N) con-
straint is satisﬁed if and only if
NCC RelOp N ∧∀c ∈Colours : NCC(c) ≤1
(5)
The violation of a colour decision variable, say Colour(v) for vertex v, is the current
excess number, if any, of connected components of ColourGraph for the colour of v:
violation(Colour(v)) = NCC(α(Colour(v))) −1
(6)
This variable violation is zero if v currently has a colour for which there is exactly one
connected component in ColourGraph, and positive otherwise.
The violation of the counter decision variable N is 0 or 1 depending on whether NCC
is in relation RelOp with the current value of N:
violation(N) = 1 −[NCC RelOp α(N)]
(7)
This variable violation is zero if NCC RelOp α(N) currently holds, and one otherwise.
The violation of the constraint is the sum of the variable violation of N and the
current excess number, if any, of connected components for all colours:
violation = violation(N) +
X
c∈Colours
max(NCC(c) −1, 0)
(8)
The constraint violation is zero if NCC RelOp α(N) holds and there currently is at most
one connected component in ColourGraph for each colour.
The impact on the constraint violation of a colour assignment move Colour(v) := c is
measured by the following colour assignment delta function:
∆(Colour(v) := c) =
let p = [∀w ∈Adj(v) : α(Colour(w)) ̸= c]
m = [∀w ∈Adj(v) : α(Colour(w)) ̸= α(Colour(v))]
in p −m + [NCC RelOp α(N)] −[NCC + p −m RelOp α(N)]
(9)
Indeed, only the violation of the unchanged N and the numbers of connected components
of the old and new colour of vertex v need to be considered.
On the one hand, the
number of connected components of colour c increases by one if all vertices adjacent to
14

v do not currently have its new colour c, so that v forms a new connected component of
colour c. On the other hand, the number of connected components of colour α(Colour(v))
decreases by one if all vertices adjacent to v do not currently have that original colour
of v, so that v was the last element of some connected component of colour α(Colour(v)).
To avoid increasing the number of connected components and increase the likelihood of
decreasing their number, it is advisable to use a neighbourhood where vertices at the
border of a connected component are re-coloured using a currently unused colour or the
colour of an adjacent connected component. An assignment move on vertex v can be
diﬀerentially probed in time linear in the degree of v in G.
A colour swap move Colour(v) :=: Colour(w), where vertices v and w exchange their
colours, is the sequential composition of the two colour assignment moves Colour(v) :=
α(Colour(w)) and Colour(w) := α(Colour(v)).
The colour swap delta is the sum of
the deltas for these two moves (upon incrementally making the ﬁrst move), and there
is no asymptotically faster way to compute this delta, as the complexity of probing an
assignment move does not depend on the number of vertices.
The additive impact on the constraint violation of a counter assignment move N := n
is measured by the following counter assignment delta function:
∆(N := n) = [NCC RelOp α(N)] −[NCC RelOp n]
The violation increases by one if the number of connected components was but now is not
in relation RelOp with N. It decreases by one if the number of connected components now
is but was not in relation RelOp with N. An assignment move on N can be diﬀerentially
probed in constant time.
To achieve incrementality, once a move has been picked and made, the internal data
structures and the variable and constraint violations must be updated. From the colour
assignment delta function (9), the following updating code for a colour assignment move
Colour(v) := c follows directly, where the new assignment α′ is the old assignment α,
except that α′(Colour(v)) = c:
1: if ∀w ∈Adj(v) : α(Colour(w)) ̸= c then {v forms a new CC of colour c}
2:
NCC (c) := NCC (c) + 1
3:
NCC := NCC + 1
4:
violation := violation + 1
5: if ∀w ∈Adj(v) : α(Colour(w)) ̸= α(Colour(v)) then {v formed a CC of α(Colour(v))}
6:
NCC (α(Colour(v))) := NCC(α(Colour(v))) −1
7:
NCC := NCC −1
8:
violation := violation −1
9: for all v ∈V do
10:
violation(Colour(v)) := α′(NCC(Colour(v))) −1
11: violation(N) := 1 −[NCC RelOp α(N)]
Incremental updating for a colour assignment move takes time linear in the degree of
vertex v in G and linear in the number |V | of vertices (and colour decision variables).
Code follows similarly for the colour swap and counter assignment moves.
For the remaining constraints, we assume that some relationships among internal
data structures, such as (4), and the violation functions, such as (6) to (8), are deﬁned as
15

invariants [21], so that the solver automatically updates these quantities incrementally,
without the constraint designer having to write explicit code, such as lines 3, 4, and 7
to 11.
Hard Constraint.
If the Connected constraint is considered implicitly, as in our [12],
then it can be satisﬁed cheaply in the start assignment, by partitioning G into connected
components and setting N according to RelOp, and maintained as satisﬁed upon every
move, by only considering moves that re-colour a vertex at the border of a connected
component to the colour of an adjacent connected component. For instance, if RelOp is
equality, then one can partition G into n = max(dom(N)) connected components and set
N := n.
5.1.2
Propagator
One Dimension.
If G is induced by a one-dimensional space, then propagation goes
as follows.
If a vertex v is given a colour c (by obtaining dom(Colour(v)) = {c} in the current
state through propagation of either another constraint or a search decision), then:
• Let ℓbe the rightmost vertex, if any, to the left of v where c /∈dom(Colour(ℓ)).
• Let r be the leftmost vertex, if any, to the right of v where c /∈dom(Colour(r)).
• Let ℓ′ be the rightmost vertex with ℓ′ ⪯v where dom(Colour(ℓ′)) = {c}.
• Let r′ be the leftmost vertex with v ⪯r′ where dom(Colour(r′)) = {c}.
All occurrences of colour c must be strictly between vertices ℓand r. All vertices from ℓ′
to r′ must get colour c. Hence we prune as follows:
• If ℓexists, then:
1. Prune value c from the domain of every vertex to the left of ℓ.
2. If dom(Colour(ℓ)) = {d}, then prune value d from the domain of every vertex
to the right of v.
• If r exists, then:
1. Prune value c from the domain of every vertex to the right of r.
2. If dom(Colour(r)) = {d}, then prune value d from the domain of every vertex
to the left of v.
• Set dom(Colour(i)) = {c} for every vertex i with ℓ′ ≺i ≺r′.
To propagate on N, it is best for the propagator to have an internal data structure: see
the multi-dimensional case for details.
This propagator is only worth invoking when the domain of one of its decision variables
shrinks to a singleton. It achieves domain consistency. No propagation is possible when
the domain of a decision variable loses a value without becoming a singleton.
16

Arbitrary Number of Dimensions.
If G is induced by a space of more than one
dimension, then the notions of ‘left’ and ‘right’ have to be generalised. We assume that
the propagator initialises (at its ﬁrst invocation) and updates (at subsequent invocations)
the following internal data structures, which are strongly related to those we use in
Section 5.1.1 for stochastic local search:1
• The induced graph ColourGraph (which we deﬁne but do not store for stochastic
local search).
• Let NCC(c) denote the number of connected components of ColourGraph whose
vertices currently have colour c in their domains, with c ∈Colours.
• Let NCC denote the current sum of all NCC(c), as in formula (4).
The semantics (5) of the constraint gives us a constraint checker and a feasibility test.
Upon pruning of values (by propagation of either another constraint or a search deci-
sion) from the domain of a colour decision variable Colour(v), we (possibly incrementally)
update the internal data structures and use the graph invariants of [5] in order to obtain
possible pruning on other colour decision variables if not the counter decision variable N.
We conjecture that this achieves domain consistency, like in the one-dimensional case.
Upon pruning of values from the domain of the counter decision variable N, we
presently do not know whether pruning is possible on the colour decision variables.
Discussion.
For many choices of RelOp and N, the Connected constraint is easy
to satisfy, namely by colouring all vertices with the same colour, so that there is only
one connected component. In other words, the density of solutions to the Connected
constraint may be very high within the Cartesian product of the domains of its decision
variables. Such a situation is not very conducive to propagation, as discussed next.
Starting from full colour domains for all vertices, there potentially is only one con-
nected component until the underlying space is cut into at least two sub-spaces by colour-
ing an entire swathe of vertices in some colour that has already been eliminated for other
vertices. Only a very speciﬁc search procedure would achieve this only situation that
is conducive to domain pruning. While this situation often arises naturally in a one-
dimensional space, it does not do so in a multi-dimensional space and systematic search
with interleaved propagation essentially degenerates into generate-and-test search, be-
cause the propagator of Connected can only be invoked near the leaves of the search
tree.
In conclusion, we are pessimistic about the utility of a propagator for the Connected
constraint in a multi-dimensional space, at least when following the graph colouring
approach.
Unless a representation more conducive to propagation can be found, we
advocate stochastic local search over systematic search in the presence of this constraint.
1The strong relationship between internal datastructures needed for the violation and diﬀerentiation
functions of stochastic local search and internal data structures needed for propagators of systematic
search was not obvious to the authors at the outset of this research: this issue is worth investigating
further, as code generation might be possible.
17

5.2
Compactness
Consider a graph G = ⟨V, E⟩induced by a space of at least two dimensions.
The
Compact(G, Colour, t) constraint holds if and only if the sum of the sphericity dis-
crepancies of the connected components of the graph ColourGraph induced by G and the
sequence Colour is at most the threshold t, whose value is given.
The sphericity discrepancy of a connected component is deﬁned as follows. Recall
that in G each facet is endowed with a surface area, and each vertex is endowed with a
volume. We deﬁne the following concepts:
• In Section 4.1, we formalised the notion of border vertices, that is vertices at the
edge of the geometry. Here we are dealing with colouring, so we need to formalise
the border of coloured regions. A facet f of a vertex v is a border facet under a
sequence Colour if v has no adjacent vertex for f or v has a diﬀerent colour than
the adjacent vertex that shares f. Formally, a facet f ∈∂(v) of a vertex v is a
border facet if and only if the following statement
Colour(w) ̸= Colour(v)
holds for the vertex w that shares f with v.
To simplify the formalisation, we assume that we are working with background
geometry of the form G⊥for some given background geometry G. That is, there is
a unique special vertex in V , called ⊥, that shares a facet with every vertex where
there otherwise is no adjacent vertex for that facet. Now a vertex has exactly one
adjacent vertex for each of its facets.
• The border surface area of a set W of vertices that have the same colour under a se-
quence Colour (such as a connected component of the induced graph ColourGraph),
denoted by AW, is the sum of the surface areas of the border facets of the vertices
in W:
AW =
X
v∈W
X
w∈Adj(v)
f∈∂(v)∩∂(w)
w /∈W
[Colour(w) ̸= Colour(v)] · Area(v, f)
(10)
Recall that |∂(v) ∩∂(w)| = 1 when vertices v and w are adjacent.
• The sphere surface area of a set W of vertices that have the same colour under a
sequence Colour, denoted by SW, is the surface area of a sphere that has as volume
the total volume VW of the vertices in W (see [22] for the derivation of this formula):
SW = π1/3 · (6 · VW)2/3
where
VW =
X
w∈W
Volume(w)
In case G is induced by a 3D cuboid divided into same-sized regions, we can rather
deﬁne the sphere surface area as the surface area of the smallest collection of regions
that contains the sphere that has as volume the total volume of the vertices in W.
We omit the mathematical details, as they are speciﬁc to the shape of the regions:
a space can be tiled by any kind of polyhedra, such as cubes or beehive cells.
18

• The sphericity discrepancy of a set W of vertices that have the same colour under a
sequence Colour, denoted by ΨW, is the diﬀerence between the border surface area
of W under Colour and the sphere surface area of W under Colour:
δΨW = AW −SW
We derive this concept from the sphericity Ψ of a shape p, deﬁned in [22] to be
the ratio between the surface area Sp of a sphere that has the same volume as
p and the surface area Ap of p; note that Ψ = 1 if p is a sphere, and 0 < Ψ < 1
otherwise, assuming p is not empty. Our concept would be deﬁned as the subtraction
Ap −Sp rather than as the ratio Sp/Ap, as we need (for stochastic local search) a
non-negative metric that is 0 in the good case, namely when p is (the smallest
over-approximation of) a sphere.
Note that the Compact constraint imposes no limit on the number of connected
components of ColourGraph per colour: if there are several connected components for a
colour, then the total sphericity discrepancy may be unnecessarily large.
Such a compactness constraint is a soft constraint in our prior work on airspace sec-
torisation under stochastic local search [12], but lacks the threshold t there; we generalise
the ideas of its violation and diﬀerentiation functions using the concept of sphericity
discrepancy, and we describe them in much more detail.
There was no compactness constraint in our prior work on airspace sectorisation using
systematic search [11], and we are not aware of any published propagator for any such
constraint.
5.2.1
Violation and Diﬀerentiation Functions
Soft Constraint.
If the Compact constraint is considered explicitly, then we proceed
as follows. We initialise and incrementally maintain the following data structures, which
are internal to the constraint:
• Let Border(v) denote the border surface area of the vertex set {v}. If every vertex
only has facets of unit surface area (for instance, when G is induced by a space
divided into same-sized cubes or squares), then Border(v) is deﬁned as follows:
Border(v) =
X
w∈Adj(v)
[α(Colour(w)) ̸= α(Colour(v))]
Otherwise, the formula needs to be generalised as follows, using (10):
Border(v) =
X
w∈Adj(v)
f∈∂(v)∩∂(w)
[α(Colour(w)) ̸= α(Colour(v))] · Area(v, f)
• Let CCs denote the current set of connected components of the induced graph
ColourGraph, each encoded by a tuple ⟨σ, ν⟩, meaning that it currently has total
surface area σ and total volume ν.
19

The violation of a decision variable, say Colour(v) for vertex v, is its current weighted
border surface area:
violation(Colour(v)) = f(Border(v))
where the weight function f can be the identity function, but can also suitably penalise
larger border surface areas, provided f(0) = 0; in [12], we found that using f as λx : x2
works well enough. The variable violation is zero if v is not a border facet.
The violation of the constraint is the current excess, if any, of the sum of the sphericity
discrepancies of the connected components:
violation = max


X
⟨σ,ν⟩∈CCs
 σ −π1/3 · (6 · ν)2/3
−t, 0


(11)
The constraint violation is zero if the total sphericity discrepancy does not exceed t.
To deﬁne the additive impact ∆(Colour(v) := c) on the constraint violation of an
assignment move Colour(v) := c, we ﬁrst deﬁne the impact on the violation of a variable
Colour(w) for a vertex w that shares a facet f with v:
δ(Colour(w), Colour(v) := c)
=









−Area(v, f)
if α(Colour(v)) ̸= α(Colour(w)) = c ∧w ∈Adj(v) ∧f ∈∂(v) ∩∂(w)
+0
if α(Colour(v)) ̸= α(Colour(w)) ̸= c
∨α(Colour(v)) = α(Colour(w)) = c
+Area(v, f)
if α(Colour(v)) = α(Colour(w)) ̸= c ∧w ∈Adj(v) ∧f ∈∂(v) ∩∂(w)
This diﬀerential probing can be done in constant time.
The impact on the violation of Colour(v) itself is the sum of the impacts on the
violations of the variables corresponding to the vertices adjacent to v:
δ(Colour(v), Colour(v) := c) =
X
w∈Adj(v)
δ(Colour(w), Colour(v) := c)
(12)
This diﬀerential probing can be done in time linear in the degree of v in G.
The impact ∆(Colour(v) := c) on the constraint violation of an assignment move
Colour(v) := c can unfortunately not be computed cheaply. The connected component
containing v with its original colour α(Colour(v)) may be split into several components
after the move. Further, the connected component containing v with its new colour c
may be the merger of several components existing prior to the move. The same holds
for the connected components containing the vertices adjacent to v: some of them may
merge after the move. Hence the only way to measure the exact impact using all the
connected components is ﬁrst to compute the new connected components, in Θ(V + E)
time, as well as their surface area and volume attributes, and then to subtract the old
violation from the new violation computed using (11). One may of course choose not to
probe at all the impact on the violation of the Compact constraint during search. One
may also be content with a much more cheaply computed approximate impact, namely
δ(Colour(v), Colour(v) := c), which as we saw can be computed in time linear in the
degree of v in G.
20

If probing is used during search, the described exact probing in time linear in the size
of G is considered too expensive, and the described fast approximate probing is deemed
too risky (as it can be an under-approximation, which is dangerous [8]), then we propose
another measure of constraint violation, which does not need the data structure CCs but
leads to a coarser approximation of sphericity. This requires ﬁrst changing the semantics
of the constraint: the Compact(G, Colour, t) constraint holds if and only if the sum of
the border surface areas of all vertices is at most the threshold t, whose value is given.
We then redeﬁne the violation of the constraint to be the excess, if any, of the current
total weighted border surface area of all vertices:
violation = max
 
1
2 ·
X
i∈V
violation(Colour(i)) −t, 0
!
(13)
The factor 1
2 compensates for every shared facet being counted twice. The constraint
violation is zero if the current total weighted border surface area does not exceed t.
The impact ∆(Colour(v) := c) on the constraint violation of an assignment move
Colour(v) := c can now be computed cheaply. Let s be the current value of the expres-
sion 1
2 · P
i∈V violation(Colour(i)) −t inside (13). Since the violations of the variables
corresponding to v and its adjacent vertices are the only terms that potentially change in
the evaluation of s, that expression changes due to (12) by δ(Colour(v), Colour(v) := c)
only. We get the following assignment delta function:
∆(Colour(v) := c) = max(s + δ(Colour(v), Colour(v) := c), 0) −max(s, 0)
An assignment move on vertex v can be diﬀerentially probed in time linear in the degree
of v in G.
It is advisable to use a neighbourhood where vertices at the border of a connected
component are re-coloured using a currently unused colour or the colour of an adjacent
connected component.
A swap move Colour(v) :=: Colour(w), where vertices v and w exchange their colours,
is the sequential composition of the two assignment moves Colour(v) := α(Colour(w))
and Colour(w) := α(Colour(v)). The swap delta is the sum of the assignment deltas for
these two moves (upon incrementally making the ﬁrst move), and there is no asymptoti-
cally faster way to compute this delta, as the complexity of probing an assignment move
does not depend on the number of vertices.
We omit the rather clerical code for achieving incrementality.
Hard Constraint.
It is very diﬃcult to consider the Compact constraint implicitly,
as it is not obvious how to satisfy it cheaply in the start assignment and under what
probed moves to maintain it satisﬁed.
5.2.2
Propagator
Even more so than a propagator for the Connected constraint (see Section 5.1.2),
a propagator for the Compact constraint will not be able to perform much domain
pruning until most of the decision variables have singleton domains. Indeed, there is no
useful particular case of Compact for one-dimensional spaces (unlike for Connected,
21

where in a one-dimensional space connectedness reduces to stretch contiguity, for which
signiﬁcant pruning is possible, even to domain consistency), and for Compact there can
be several connected components per colour (unlike for Connected, where every colour
has at most one connected component). In fact, if the threshold t is not exceeded by the
sphericity discrepancy of the entire underlying space, then the Compact constraint is
easy to satisfy (like Connected), namely by colouring all vertices with the same colour,
so that there is only one connected component. For the implications of this insight, see
the discussion of propagation of the Connected constraint in Section 5.1.2.
5.3
Minimum Dwell Time: Minimum Stretch Sum
Consider a graph G = ⟨V, E⟩induced by a one-dimensional space, so that the two se-
quences Colour and Value are indexed by a vertex sequence V rather than vertex set. The
StretchSum(G, Colour, Value, RelOp, t) constraint, with RelOp ∈{≤, <, =, ̸=, >, ≥},
holds if and only if every stretch of the sequence Colour corresponds to a subsequence of
Value whose sum is in relation RelOp with threshold t, whose value is given. Formally:
∀ℓ⪯r ∈V : Stretch(Colour, ℓ, r)
⇒
 X
ℓ⪯v⪯r
Value(v)
!
RelOp t
Note that there is no limit on the number of stretches per colour.
In airspace sectorisation, every ﬂight entering a sector must stay within it for a given
minimum amount of time (say t = 120 seconds), so that the coordination work pays oﬀ
and that conﬂict management is possible. This minimum dwell-time constraint is achieved
by posting for every ﬂight f a StretchSum(G, Colour, Value, ≥, 120) constraint on the
sequence Colour of decision variables denoting the sequence of colours of its visited region
sequence V , with Value storing the durations of the ﬂight f in each region:
Value = [t′
i −ti | ⟨, ti, t′
i⟩∈Plan(f)]
The StretchSum constraint is a soft constraint in our prior work on airspace sectori-
sation under stochastic local search [12], but the constraint violation is deﬁned diﬀerently
there (in a manner that requires an asymptotically higher runtime to compute than the
one we give below), and the variable violation and diﬀerentiation functions are not given
there (though they are in the unpublished code underlying the experiments).
The StretchSum constraint is called the SlidingSum constraint in our prior work
on airspace sectorisation under systematic search [11], but the propagator outlined there
is very diﬀerent from the one we describe below, as it is only worth invoking when the
domain of one of its decision variables shrinks to a singleton.
5.3.1
Violation and Diﬀerentiation Functions
Soft Constraint.
If the StretchSum constraint is considered explicitly, then we pro-
ceed as follows. For simplicity of notation, we assume that RelOp is ≥. The other values
of RelOp are handled analogously. We initialise and incrementally maintain the following
data structure, which is internal to the constraint:
22

• Let Stretch(v) denote the tuple ⟨ℓ, r, c, σ⟩, meaning that vertex v ∈V is currently
in a colour stretch, from vertex ℓto vertex r, whose colour is c and value sum is σ:
σ =
X
ℓ⪯i⪯r
Value(i)
We say that a colour stretch with value sum σ is a violating stretch if σ is smaller than
the threshold t:
σ ≱t
The violation of a decision variable, say Colour(v) for vertex v with Stretch(v) =
⟨ℓ, r, c, σ⟩, where α(Colour(v)) = c, is deﬁned as follows:
violation(Colour(v)) =









0
if v /∈{ℓ, r}
0
if v ∈{ℓ, r} ∧σ ≥t ∧σ −Value(v) ≱t
Value(v)
if v ∈{ℓ, r} ∧σ ≥t ∧σ −Value(v) ≥t
1
if v ∈{ℓ, r} ∧σ ≱t
The variable violation is zero if v is currently either not at the border (leftmost or right-
most element) of its colour stretch (so that ﬂipping its colour would break its current
stretch into three stretches) or at the border of a non-violating colour stretch that would
become violating upon losing v. The variable violation is positive if v is currently at the
border of a colour stretch that is either non-violating and would remain so upon losing
v (so that it can contribute Value(v) to the value sum of the adjacent colour stretch, if
any) or violating (so that there is an incentive to drop v and eventually eliminate this
stretch).
The violation of the constraint is the current number of violating colour stretches:
violation =
X
⟨, , ,σ⟩∈Stretch
[σ ≱t]
The constraint violation is zero if there currently is no violating colour stretch.
Let us now measure the additive impact on the constraint violation of an assignment
move Colour(v) := d, with Stretch(v) = ⟨ℓ, r, c, σ⟩. For simplicity of notation, we assume
d ̸= c. Let the colour stretch to the left be ⟨ℓ′, r′, c′, σ′⟩, with pred(ℓ) = r′ if it exists,
and ⟨⊥, ⊥, γ, +∞⟩otherwise, with γ /∈Colours. Similarly, let the colour stretch to the
right be ⟨ℓ′′, r′′, c′′, σ′′⟩, with succ(r) = ℓ′′ if it exists, and ⟨⊥, ⊥, γ, +∞⟩otherwise, with
γ /∈Colours. The assignment delta function is deﬁned as follows:
∆(Colour(v) := d)
=



































−[σ′ ≱t ∧[c′ = d] · σ′ + σ + [c′′ = d] · σ′′ ≥t]
−[σ ≱t]
−[σ′′ ≱t ∧[c′ = d] · σ′ + σ + [c′′ = d] · σ′′ ≥t]
if ℓ= v = r
[σ ≥t ∧σ −Value(v) ≱t] −[σ′ ≱t ∧σ′ + Value(v) ≥t]
if ℓ= v ≺r ∧d = c′
[Value(v) ≱t] + [σ ≥t ∧σ −Value(v) ≱t]
if ℓ= v ≺r ∧d ̸= c′
(analogous to the two previous cases)
if ℓ≺v = r
2
if ℓ≺v ≺r ∧σ ≱t
" X
ℓ⪯i≺v
Value(i) ≱t
#
+ [Value(v) ≱t] +
" X
v≺i⪯r
Value(i) ≱t
#
if ℓ≺v ≺r ∧σ ≥t
23

An assignment move on vertex v can be diﬀerentially probed in time at worst linear in
the number |V | of vertices. This is so only in the last case and when there currently is
only one colour stretch. In all other cases, diﬀerential probing takes constant time.
It is advisable to use a neighbourhood where vertices at the border of a stretch are
re-coloured using a currently unused colour or the colour of an adjacent connected com-
ponent.
A swap move Colour(v) :=: Colour(w), where vertices v and w exchange their colours,
is the sequential composition of the two assignment moves Colour(v) := α(Colour(w))
and Colour(w) := α(Colour(v)). The swap delta is the sum of the assignment deltas
for these two moves (upon incrementally making the ﬁrst move), and there is no asymp-
totically faster way to compute this delta, as at most one of these two moves has the
worst-case probing complexity that depends on the number of vertices.
We omit the rather clerical code for achieving incrementality.
Hard Constraint.
If the StretchSum constraint is considered implicitly, then it can
be satisﬁed cheaply in the start assignment, by greedily colouring the vertices from left
to right so that every stretch has an adequate sum. However, it may be impossible to
maintain this constraint as satisﬁed upon every move, even when only considering moves
that re-colour one or more vertices at the border of a stretch to the colour of an adjacent
stretch.
5.3.2
Propagator
A checker for the StretchSum(G, Colour, Value, RelOp, t) constraint can be elegantly
modelled using the following deterministic ﬁnite automaton (DFA) with a counter and
predicates on the transitions:
i
{k := Value(ﬁrst(V ))}
k RelOp t
Colour(v) = Colour(pred(v)) {k := k + Value(v)}
Colour(v) ̸= Colour(pred(v)) {k RelOp t ⇒k := Value(v)}
There is a unique state, called i: it is the start state (as marked by a transition coming
in from nowhere) and an accepting state (as marked by the double circle).
There is
a unique counter, called k: it is initialised on the start transition to the value of the
leftmost vertex; without loss of generality, we assume V ̸= ∅. The transitions are made
on the truth values of predicates on a current vertex v and its predecessor. The counter
evolves on each such transition, unconditionally in the top transition (because v is in the
colour stretch of its predecessor) and conditionally in the bottom transition (because v
starts a new colour stretch). If a conditional transition fails, then a transition is made
to an implicit failure state, which has only self-looping transitions. Upon processing the
rightmost vertex, the accepting state is actually accepting only if the attached acceptance
condition (drawn in a box connected to it by a dashed line) is satisﬁed: it ensures that
the last stretch has an adequate sum.
24

Such automata were introduced in [3]. Assume the following constraints, called sig-
nature constraints, for new Boolean decision variables Sig(v), called signature variables,
with initial domain {0, 1}:
∀v ∈V \ {ﬁrst(V )} : Colour(v) = Colour(pred(v)) ⇔Sig(v) = 1
We can feed these |V \ {ﬁrst(V )}| signature variables into a DFA with a counter, just
like the one above, except that the top predicate is replaced by alphabet symbol 1, and
the bottom one by 0. It is shown in [3] how to prototype rapidly a propagator from such
a constraint checker using the Automaton constraint. In this case, it probably does not
achieve domain consistency, but one can try and boost its propagation using our ideas
in [7].
5.4
Balanced Workload
The Balanced(G, Colour, Value, µ, ∆) constraint holds if and only if the sums of the
given integer values under Value of the vertices having the same colour under Colour are
balanced, in the sense of having the (possibly unknown, and not necessarily integer) value
µ as average and having discrepancies to µ that do not exceed the (possibly unknown)
integer threshold ∆. If ∆is not given, then it may appear in the objective function,
towards being minimised. Formally, the constraint can be decomposed into the following
conjunction:
∀i ∈Colours : X[i] =
X
v∈V
([Colour(v) = i] · Value(v)) ∧Γ(X, µ, ∆)
(14)
where constraint Γ is either Spread or Deviation, thereby giving a concrete deﬁnition
to the used abstract concept of discrepancy:
• The Spread(X, ∆, µ) constraint [16] holds if and only if the n integer variables X[i]
have the (possibly unknown, and not necessarily integer) value µ as average and
the sum of the squared diﬀerences (n · X[i] −n · µ)2 does not exceed the (possibly
unknown) integer threshold ∆.
• The Deviation(X, ∆, µ) constraint [19] holds if and only if the n integer variables
X[i] have the (possibly unknown, and not necessarily integer) value µ as average and
the sum of the deviations |n · X[i] −n · µ| does not exceed the (possibly unknown)
integer threshold ∆.
The multiplications by n in the deﬁnitions of discrepancy lift all reasoning to integer
domains even when µ is not an integer, as Pn
i=1 X[i] = n · µ and the X[i] are integer
variables: the integer threshold ∆has to be calibrated accordingly.
One could also
use the Range(X, RelOp, ∆) constraint [4], which holds if and only if max(X) + 1 −
min(X) RelOp ∆, but we do not pursue this option further.
In airspace sectorisation, the workload of each sector must be within some given
imbalance factor of the average across all sectors. Hence one would take Value as the
Workload function of Section 4. Recall that we only consider additive workloads, such
as monitoring workload and conﬂict workload, but no non-additive workloads, such as
25

coordination workload. Note that µ is known when the number n of sectors (and thus
colours) is imposed:
µ =
P
v∈V Workload(v)
n
(15)
The workload balancing constraint is a soft constraint in our prior work on airspace
sectorisation under stochastic local search [12], but its concept of discrepancy is deﬁned
in terms of a ratio rather than a diﬀerence with the average µ, namely X[i]/µ ≤1 + ∆
for each i (in the experiments, ∆= 0.05 was used). This concept of discrepancy is less
related to standard concepts in statistics.
A workload balancing constraint is also used in our prior work on airspace sectorisation
under systematic search [11], but again under a diﬀerent concept of discrepancy with the
average µ, namely 1 −∆≤X[i]/µ ≤1 + ∆for each i (in the experiments, ∆= 0.25
was used). The constraint is enforced not by a propagator, but by setting the domains of
the X[i] integer decision variables to {⌈(1 −∆) · µ⌉, . . . , ⌊(1 + ∆) · µ⌋}, which is possible
when ∆is given as µ is a known constant by (15). This modelling trick cannot be applied
with the deﬁnitions of discrepancy for Spread and Deviation.
5.4.1
Violation and Diﬀerentiation Functions
We here handle the Balanced constraint for the case Γ = Deviation. Handling the
case Γ = Spread can be done using the same ideas. We assume Colours = {1, 2, . . . , n}.
Soft Constraint.
If the Balanced(G, Colour, Value, µ, ∆) constraint is considered
explicitly, then we proceed as follows. For simplicity of notation, we assume ∆and µ are
given, and that µ is an integer. Relaxing these assumptions can be done using the same
ideas as below. The multiplications by the number n of colours in the deﬁnition of the
underlying Deviation constraint can then be eliminated, upon dividing ∆by n2, giving
the following simpliﬁed semantics of Balanced:
n
X
i=1
X[i] = n · µ
(16)
and
n
X
i=1
|X[i] −µ| ≤∆
(17)
where
∀i ∈{1, . . . , n} : X[i] =
X
v∈V
([Colour(v) = i] · Value(v))
(18)
Note that (18) implies
n
X
i=1
X[i] =
X
v∈V
Value(v)
so that, using (16), we must have
µ =
P
v∈V Value(v)
n
(19)
26

similarly to (15). From now on, we assume the given Value and µ satisfy (19), so that
we need not reason about (16), as it is then surely satisﬁed, because implied when (18) is
satisﬁed. Formula (18) itself deﬁnes the auxiliary decision variables X[i], so it suﬃces to
set it up as a set of invariants [21]. In conclusion, we only need to deal with formula (17).
The violation of a decision variable, say Colour(v) for vertex v, is the same as the
violation of the auxiliary decision variable X[α(Colour(v))], which is functionally depen-
dent on Colour(v) under (18). This violation is the current deviation from µ of the value
sum for the current colour of v:
violation(Colour(v)) = violation(X[α(Colour(v))]) = |α(X[α(Colour(v))]) −µ|
The variable violation is zero if v currently has a colour i whose value sum X[i] is equal
to µ, and thus contributes nothing to the total deviation for all colours.
The violation of the constraint is the excess, if any, over ∆of the sum of the current
deviations from µ of the value sums for all colours. We need not initialise and maintain any
internal data structure for this purpose, as each auxiliary decision variable X[i] contains
the current value sum for colour i, and its variable violation is the current deviation from
µ of the value sum for colour i. Hence the constraint violation is deﬁned as follows:
violation = max
 n
X
i=1
violation(X[i]) −∆, 0
!
(20)
The constraint violation is zero if the total deviation for all colours currently does not
exceed ∆.
The impact on the constraint violation of an assignment move Colour(v) := c is
measured as follows. We assume α(Colour(v)) = d. Let s be the current value of the ﬁrst
argument of the maximisation expression in (20), and let s′ be the same value except for
colours c and d:
s′ =
n
X
i=1
i/∈{c,d}
violation(X[i]) −∆= s −|α(X[c]) −µ| −|α(X[d]) −µ|
We get the following assignment delta function:
∆(Colour(v) := c)
= max(s′ + |α(X[c]) + Value(v) −µ| + |α(X[d]) −Value(v) −µ| , 0) −max(s, 0)
An assignment move can be diﬀerentially probed in constant time.
A swap move Colour(v) :=: Colour(w), where vertices v and w exchange their colours,
is the sequential composition of the two assignment moves Colour(v) := α(Colour(w))
and Colour(w) := α(Colour(v)). The swap delta is the sum of the assignment deltas for
these two moves (upon incrementally making the ﬁrst move), and there is no asymptot-
ically faster way to compute this delta, as probing an assignment move takes constant
time.
We omit the rather clerical code for achieving incrementality.
Hard Constraint.
It is very diﬃcult to consider the Balanced constraint implicitly,
as it is not obvious how to satisfy it cheaply in the start assignment and under what
probed moves to maintain it satisﬁed.
27

5.4.2
Propagator
Due to the decomposition (14) of the Balanced constraint using either the Spread
or the Deviation constraint, we refer to [16, 19] for propagators for these constraints.
Bounds consistency can be achieved in O (n · log n) time and O (n) time, respectively.
The remaining part of (14), namely
∀i ∈Colours : X[i] =
X
v∈V
([Colour(v) = i] · Value(v))
can be further decomposed as follows, using reiﬁcation and a 2D matrix of new Boolean
decision variables B[i, v]:
∀i ∈Colours : ∀v ∈V : Colour(v) = i ⇔B[i, v] = 1
∧∀i ∈Colours : Linear(Value, B[i, ∗], =, X[i])
The propagation of reiﬁed constraints and the Linear constraint are standard features of
every constraint programming solver. We doubt the ﬁxpoint of these propagators achieves
domain consistency, but the development of a custom propagator for Balanced along
the lines of our [15] is future work.
5.5
Bounded Workload
The Bounded(G, Colour, Value, RelOp, t) constraint, with RelOp ∈{≤, <, =, ̸=, >, ≥},
holds if and only if every sum of the given integer values under Value of the vertices
having the same colour under Colour is in relation RelOp with threshold t, whose value
is given. Formally, the constraint can be decomposed into the following conjunction:
∀i ∈Colours :
X
v∈V
([Colour(v) = i] · Value(v)) RelOp t
This can be further decomposed as follows, using reiﬁcation and a 2D matrix of new
Boolean decision variables B[i, v]:
∀i ∈Colours : ∀v ∈V : Colour(v) = i ⇔B[i, v] = 1
∧∀i ∈Colours : Linear(Value, B[i, ∗], RelOp, t)
The handling of reiﬁed constraints and the Linear constraint are standard features
of every constraint programming solver, so we need not develop any new propagators
or violation and diﬀerentiation functions. We doubt the ﬁxpoint of these propagators
achieves domain consistency, but the development of a custom propagator for Bounded
along the lines of our [15] is future work.
In airspace sectorisation, the workload of each sector must not exceed some upper
bound. Hence one would take Value as the Workload function of Section 4, and RelOp
as ≤. Recall that we only consider additive workloads, such as monitoring workload and
conﬂict workload, but no non-additive workloads, such as coordination workload.
We did not consider a bounded-workload constraint in our prior work on airspace
sectorisation under stochastic local search [12] and systematic search [11], but such a
constraint has been considered by others, as discussed in our survey [6].
28

5.6
Balanced Size
In airspace sectorisation, the size of each sector must be within some given imbalance
factor of the average across all sectors. Hence one can use the Balanced constraint of
Section 5.4, with Value as the Volume function of Section 4.
We did not consider a balanced-size constraint in our prior work on airspace sectori-
sation under stochastic local search [12] and systematic search [11], but such a constraint
has been considered by others, as discussed in our survey [6].
5.7
Minimum Distance: No Border Vertices in Stretches
Let P be the sequence of vertices of a simple path in graph G = ⟨V, E⟩, plus the special
vertex ⊥at the beginning and at the end. The NonBorder(G, Colour, P) constraint
holds if and only if all vertices of all stretches of the projection, denoted by Colour(P),
of Colour onto the vertices of P (and in the vertex ordering of P) only have adjacent
vertices outside P of the same colour:
∀ℓ⪯r ∈P \ [⊥] : Stretch(Colour(P), ℓ, r)
⇒∀ℓ⪯v ⪯r ∈P : ∀w ∈Adj(v) \ P : Colour(w) = Colour(v)
This constraint is trivially satisﬁed when the graph G is induced by a one-dimensional
geometry, as every vertex in P then has no adjacent vertices outside P. Note that there
is no limit on the number of stretches per colour.
In airspace sectorisation, each existing trajectory must be inside each sector by a
minimum distance (say ten nautical miles), so that conﬂict management is entirely local
to sectors. If the airspace is originally divided into same-sized regions whose diameter
is (at least) that minimum distance, then the border regions of each sector can only
serve as sector entry and exit regions for all ﬂights. Hence one could use a NonBorder
constraint for each ﬂight f, by setting P to its sequence of visited regions:
P = [⊥] ∪[vi | ⟨vi, , ⟩∈Plan(f)] ∪[⊥]
In our prior work on airspace sectorisation under systematic search [11], we did not need
such a minimum-distance constraint, because any regions that cannot serve as border
regions of sectors were pre-aggregated into AFBs. In our prior work on airspace sectori-
sation under stochastic local search [12], we initially used the same pre-aggregation into
AFBs in order to avoid having such a minimum-distance constraint, but it then turned
out that the Compact constraint (see Section 5.2) is very hard to satisfy when AFBs
are used, so we had concluded that a minimum-distance constraint would be necessary
after all, upon switching oﬀthe pre-aggregation into AFBs, but we did not design such
a constraint.
5.7.1
Violation and Diﬀerentiation Functions
Soft Constraint.
If the NonBorder constraint is considered explicitly, then we pro-
ceed as follows, without needing any internal datastructures.
29

The violation of a decision variable, say Colour(v) for vertex v, is deﬁned as follows:
violation(Colour(v)) =



0
if v /∈P
X
w∈Adj(v)\P
[α(Colour(w)) ̸= α(Colour(v))]
if v ∈P
The variable violation is zero if v is not in P or has no adjacent vertices outside P that
currently have a diﬀerent colour.
The violation of the constraint is the current sum of the violations of its variables:
violation =
X
v∈P
violation(Colour(v))
The constraint violation is zero if the constraint is satisﬁed.
The additive impact on the constraint violation of an assignment move Colour(v) := c
for vertex v ∈P is measured by the following assignment delta function:
∆(Colour(v) := c) =
X
w∈Adj(v)\P
([α(Colour(w)) ̸= c] −[α(Colour(w)) ̸= α(Colour(v))])
An assignment move on vertex v can be diﬀerentially probed in time linear in the degree
of v in G.
It is advisable to use a neighbourhood where vertices at the border of a stretch of
Colour(P) are re-coloured using a currently unused colour or the colour of an adjacent
vertex outside P.
A swap move Colour(v) :=: Colour(w), where vertices v and w exchange their colours,
is the sequential composition of the two assignment moves Colour(v) := α(Colour(w))
and Colour(w) := α(Colour(v)). The swap delta is the sum of the assignment deltas for
these two moves (upon incrementally making the ﬁrst move), and there is no asymptoti-
cally faster way to compute this delta, as the complexity of probing an assignment move
does not depend on the number of vertices.
We omit the rather clerical code for achieving incrementality.
Hard Constraint.
It is very diﬃcult to consider the NonBorder constraint implic-
itly, as it is not obvious how to satisfy it cheaply in the start assignment and under what
probed moves to maintain it satisﬁed.
5.7.2
Propagator
Designing a propagator for the NonBorder constraint is left as future work.
Note
that a propagator cannot even be prototyped using the Automaton constraint, as the
constraint is not only on the Colour(P) sequence of decision variables, but also on several
Colour(Adj(i)) sequences of decision variables, the set of such vertices i not being known
up front.
A diﬀerent kind of automaton (possibly with counters) would have to be
imagined, and supported with a new constraint like Automaton, in order to get a
propagator for NonBorder.
30

6
Conclusion
Airspace sectorisation provides a partition of a given airspace into sectors, subject to ge-
ometric constraints and workload constraints, so that some cost metric is minimised. We
have studied the constraints that arise in airspace sectorisation, giving for each constraint
an analysis of what algorithms and properties are required under systematic search and
stochastic local search.
6.1
Discussion
The formal semantics or decompositions of several constraints exhibit a pattern that we
had not encountered before: the decision variables of the problem functionally determine
auxiliary decision variables, which are the arguments of well-known constraints. For ex-
ample, the auxiliary variables X[i] of the decomposition (14) of the Balanced constraint
in Section 5.4 are functionally determined by the Colour(v) variables, but it is the X[i]
that are constrained by the well-known Spread or Deviation constraints. This level of
indirection makes propagation diﬃcult, but apparently often occurs in real-life problems:
overcoming this is a major research challenge for all optimisation technologies, and thus
beyond the scope of this report.
We were surprised how little propagation is possible for some airspace sectorisation
constraints, especially the Compact and Connected constraints: this explains why our
prior work using systematic search [11] was not as successful as we had hoped. In retro-
spect, we advocate achieving sector compactness by using also a constraint on maximum
dwell time, that is StretchSum(Colour, Value, ≤, t) for some suitable upper bound t on
dwell time. We believe this would trigger more propagation before most of the decision
variables have singleton domains (see Section 5.2.2). However, we do not know whether
airspace sectorisation experts would be willing to quantify the upper bound t.
We have noticed that the violation and delta functions for stochastic local search
are sometimes hard to design in a problem-independent fashion, towards making the
constraints highly reusable.
Indeed, one can often imagine several pairs of measures
for variable and constraint violation (if not constraint semantics), each pair needing a
rather diﬀerent mathematical and algorithmic apparatus for incremental maintenance
and diﬀerential probing, but the appropriate pair may depend on the actual problem or
on the neighbourhood chosen for search. It thus seems that some constraints need to be
oﬀered in several incarnations, as witnessed with the Compact constraint and with other
choices discussed in the literature we have pointed to: there is no reason to believe that
one set of choices dominates all others. The same phenomenon occurs with propagators
for systematic search, where diﬀerent levels of consistency can be aimed at, and where
diﬀerent time and space complexity trade-oﬀs exist even for propagators achieving the
same level of consistency.
6.2
Related Work
For each constraint in Section 5, we have given a discussion of all similar constraints that
we are aware of, including literature pointers.
31

6.3
Future Work
Coordination workload is not additive when aggregating the workload of a sector from the
workloads of its constituent regions. We have only handled the monitoring and conﬂict
workloads in this report, because they are additive and thus easier to reason with, and we
have assumed they are combined into a single value. This work needs to be extended to
coordination workloads, and possibly to a separate handling of all three kinds of workload.
For time reasons, we have not tackled all the constraints arising in airspace sectori-
sation (identiﬁed in Section 2), so the few remaining constraints need to be discussed in
equal depth.
The constraints should also be tackled under the set covering approach, as we have
assumed here the graph colouring approach for all the covered constraints. The repre-
sentations of the two approaches are dual (in the sense that the set covering approach
represents the inverse of the total function, of the graph colouring approach, from re-
gions to sectors). It may turn out to be beneﬁcial to switch the representation for some
constraints, if not always to use both representations at the same time, and to channel
between them.
The completion of our line of work, based on constraint programming as a combina-
torial problem solving technology, will show that all the constraints can be used in the
process of computing a sectorisation, rather than only using some and then evaluating
the results of a sectorisation algorithm according to the other constraints.
