A TALE OF FAIRNESS REVISITED:
BEYOND ADVERSARIAL LEARNING FOR DEEP NEURAL
NETWORK FAIRNESS
Mashaido Becky
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University
Boston, MA 02115

Winston Moh Tangongho
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University
Boston, MA 02115

January 11, 2021
ABSTRACT
Motivated by the need for fair algorithmic decision making in the age of automation and artiﬁcially-
intelligent technology, this technical report provides a theoretical insight into adversarial training for
fairness in deep learning. We build upon previous work in adversarial fairness, show the persistent
tradeoff between fair predictions and model performance, and explore further mechanisms that help
in offsetting this tradeoff.
1
Introduction and Motivation
1.1
What is the problem?
Machine Learning is increasingly becoming a huge part of our lives by automating decision making processes such as
who gets a loan1 or how likely an offender is bound to repeat a crime. Such algorithms however also lack transparency,
interpretability and fairness among different user demographics. We address this fairness problem using adversarial
learning techniques and explore further mechanisms to help boost the overall performance of our adversary.
1.2
Why is it interesting and important?
Depending on one’s incentives and what drives them as a researcher, scientist or developer:
Money: one would not want to build a product that doesn’t live up to its potential in terms of generating income due
to its biased targeting. For example, why build a facial recognition system for human beings that services only one
demographic and excludes the rest?
Morals: one would want to be responsible for what they build or implement and not let inherent biases facilitate the
existing forms of marginalization towards minority groups. For example, if building an applicant tracking system you
would ensure that it does not discriminate against women searching for engineering job opportunities
Science: if one seeks to solve a problem for all human beings but fail at including the different demographics, then they
achieve wrong scientiﬁc results
1.3
Why is it hard? (E.g., why do naive approaches fail?)
• Fairness is not well-deﬁned from a computational perspective. Researchers don’t have a common understanding
on how to deﬁne, measure and address fairness
1Swarns, R. L. Biased lending evolves, and blacks face trouble getting mortgages. The New York Times, 2015.
arXiv:2101.02831v1  [cs.LG]  8 Jan 2021

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 11, 2021
• Fixing models for fairness is also not as straightforward as removing race and sex attributes from training
data since models can still pick up on other biases that correlate with such protected attributes. For example,
you may remove the race attribute from a dataset but your model remains unfair since it learns the zip code
attribute, which tends to go hand in hand with racial geographical demographics
• Naive approaches attempt to explicitly train the model with adversarial examples to improve generalization of
the model but this approach does not make the model completely robust to unseen adversarial examples
• Fairness is broad and has to be applied to respective domains, it is not just one approach applied to every
domain in the same manner. You have to tweak it appropriately, to the respective domain, in order to achieve
overall fairness i.e not easily transferable
• Fairness tends to be an afterthought among machine learning researchers, instead of incorporating it throughout
the process
• There is not enough collaboration between technical and social researchers
1.4
Why hasn’t it been solved before? (Or, what’s wrong with previous proposed solutions? How does mine
differ?)
In addition to points laid out in section 1.3, previous proposed solutions tend to sacriﬁce a bit of model accuracy in
order to achieve fairness. We however try to improve both fairness and accuracy by exploring further mechanisms such
as the gradient descent-ascent algorithm, with a modiﬁed gradient update step, inspired by previous work [1]. This is all
in addition to adversarial training
We initially design our model following the work done by [3] and replicate the work done by Go Data Driven on a
COMPAS Dataset
Finally, we show that with some improvements to the gradient update step we can substantially improve our model’s
fairness, while maintaining good model accuracy
Past research has explored the use of adversarial networks to achieve fairness on the COMPAS dataset. Some have
used the metrics of false positive and false negative differences across Black and White inmates. One such example
[2] used post-processing on a standard logistic regressor that picks different thresholds for different groups and at
times added randomization. Another [5] introduced penalties for misclassiﬁed data points during training to enforce
equal false positive and false negative rates for groups. This approach then performed some optimization using the
covariance between sensitive attributes and distance between feature vectors of misclassiﬁed samples and classiﬁer
boundary. Another approach [4] demonstrated how one can use adversarial learning on real-world applications. We
therefore expand on their work by using a modiﬁed gradient update step.
1.5
What are the key components of my approach and results? Also include any speciﬁc limitations.
We use an [1] adversarial approach on the COMPAS dataset. We aim to predict the chances of recidivism of inmates at
the Broward County jail in Florida, and apply some adversarial learning approaches to optimize our model for fairness.
We look at the COMPAS model’s score and probe it for racial bias. For this project, we set our sensitive attribute as
race (Caucasian or African-American).
We deﬁne our fairness metric as a statistical rate, with the following inequality:
min(P(yˆ= 1|z = 1)
P(yˆ= 1|z = 0), P(yˆ= 1|z = 0)
P(yˆ= 1|z = 1)) ≥
p
100
(1)
This rule states that the ratio between the probability of a positive outcome given the sensitive attribute being true
and the same probability given the sensitive attribute being false is no less than p:100. A completely fair classiﬁer
will satisfy a 100% rule and a completely unfair one will satisfy a 0% rule. For this project, we use the U.S. Equal
Employment Opportunity (EEOC) and their 80% rule to quantify the disparate impact on a group of people of a
protected characteristic.
We then perform experiments and observe results. If we obtain both fairness and good model accuracy, well and good.
If we obtain fairness but not good model accuracy then we explore further methods such as using a modiﬁed gradient
update step. If we obtain good model accuracy but not achieving fairness, then we counteract scientists’ claims that
adversarial helps improve fairness in deep learning.
Speciﬁc limitations: In the case that we achieve both fairness and good model accuracy it is not a deﬁnite indicator
that this knowledge transfers well to other models or tasks in adversarial environments.
2

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 11, 2021
2
Adversarial Model and Methods
Assuming a probability model P(X, Y, Z), where X are the data, Y are the target labels, and Z are the nuisance
parameters (sensitive attributes), we consider the problem of learning a predictive model f(X) for Y conditional on the
observed values of X that is robust to uncertainty in the unknown value of Z [3].
Figure 1: Architecture for the adversarial training of a binary classiﬁer against a sensitive parameters Z. The adversary
maximizes its objective Lossz(θclf, θadv) while the classiﬁer tries to minimize its objective Lossy(θclf)
We replicate the work from Go Data Driven where for the classiﬁer we try to make the best possible recidivism
prediction while ensuring that race cannot be derived from them. This is captured by the following objective function:
minθclf [Lossy(θclf) −λLossZ(θclf, θadv)]
(2)
It learns to minimize its own prediction losses while maximizing that of the adversarial (due to λ being positive and
minimizing a negated loss is the same as maximizing it). The adversary learns on the full dataset and the classiﬁer is
given only the single batch, giving the adversary a slight edge in learning.
For the adversary, its goal is to predict the race based on the recidivism score of the classiﬁer. It is captured in the
following objective function:
minθadv[LossZ(θclf, θadv)]
(3)
2.1
Adversarial Training Procedure
1. Pre-train the classiﬁer on the full data set
2. Pre-train the adversarial on the predictions of the pre-trained classiﬁer
3. During T iterations simultaneously train the adversarial and classiﬁer networks:
(a) First train the adversarial for a single epoch while keeping the classiﬁer ﬁxed
(b) Then train the classiﬁer on a single sampled mini batch while keeping the adversarial ﬁxed
Note that the actual adversarial training starts only after the ﬁrst two pre-training steps. The results after applying this
procedure are shown in Figure 3.
2.2
Improvement with Regularized Logistic Regression
The work done by [1] shows that with their improved gradient descent algorithms, we can create models that perform
comparably or have better accuracy than other algorithms while performing better in terms of fairness, as measured by
using statistical rate (p% value). In this project, we explore two of their algorithms described in the paper and test them
on our COMPAS dataset.
For a given weight vector w ∈Rn+1, f = σ(wT xˆ), where σ(·) is the sigmoid function. We then add some noise to the
inputs to the classiﬁer to make it partially randomized. This improves our model accuracy if the gradient between the
3

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 11, 2021
gradient of the classiﬁer and gradient of the adversary are highly correlated. We accomplish this by multiplying the
inputs by some noise scalar η uniformly chosen from [0, 1].
Next, we update the Loss functions for the classiﬁer and the adversary to obtain:
The ﬁrst part of the Adversary loss function corresponds to learning the correlation between the sensitive attribute
and the class label. The second part of the loss function is a regularizer to check whether fairness is satisﬁed. Having
deﬁned our loss functions, we are ready to introduce the gradient descent algorithms.
i) Gradient descent/ascent with Normal Update: Here, we use Normal gradient descent/ascent algorithm to minimize
LC and maximize LF .By combining the two directions with a controlling parameter α > 0, we get:
ut+1 = ut + η1∇uLF ,
(4)
wt+1 = wt −η2(∇wLC −α · ∇wLF )
(5)
for some η1, η2, α > 0.
We see the results of this algorithm in Figure 4.
ii) Normal Gradient Descent with Modiﬁed Update: In the event that the gradient of fairness loss and gradient of
classiﬁcation loss are highly correlated, the previous algorithm might not ensure both fairness and accuracy. In this
algorithm, we remove the projection of ∇wLF from ∇wLC from the update. At each iteration we use the following
steps:
ut+1 = ut + η1∇uLF ,
(6)
wt+1 = wt −η2(∇wLC −α · ∇wLF −Π∇wLF ∇wLC)
(7)
for some η1, η2, α =
1
√
t.
Since the problem is a multi-objective optimization problem, we do not expect it to converge to the optimal point after
T iterations and so we apply thresholding. We therefore record the parameters for which the statistical rate and the
training accuracy is maximum and use it as a way to control the fairness of the output classiﬁer. Our results are shown
in Figure 5.
3
Experiments and Results
We evaluate the performance of our methods empirically and report the classiﬁcation accuracy and fairness on the
COMPAS dataset. We also compare the different update methods.
3.1
Dataset
COMPAS (Correctional Offender Management Proﬁling for Alternative Sanctions) is a popular commercial algorithm
used by judges and parole ofﬁcers for scoring criminal defendant’s likelihood of reoffending (recidivism). It has been
shown that the algorithm is biased in favor of white (against black) inmates based on a 2 year follow up study on who
actually committed crimes or violent crimes after 2 years.
4

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 11, 2021
We used the non violent subset of the data for offenses such as vagrancy or marijuana. So we dropped the violent
offense attributes from our table.
3.2
Experiments
For all experiments, code was written in pytorch, Dataset was the COMPAS dataset with 15201 samples and 42671
attributes (one-hot encoded). A Neural network consisting of 3 hidden layers with 32 hidden neurons at each layer was
used. Maximum number of epochs was 165.
Note: Legend of plots: African-American class is represented by the blue distribution and the Caucasian class is
represented with the pink distribution.
Before we start adversarial training, we pre-train the classiﬁer and our adversary and notice the need for fairness
optimization. We can observe the results in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Pre-trained classiﬁer and adversary. The plot shows a higher risk of recidivism for black inmates characterized
by the blue colored distribution. Also, the p% is below 80 showing a hint of bias and with the Adversary ROC AUC
above 0.5, it has the ability to detect race from the output of the classiﬁer.
Figure 3: After applying the Adversarial Training procedure. We notice the improvement in ROC AUC to 0.55 which
is still above 0.50 and the p% increase to 83. We have a sharp drop in classiﬁer accuracy and so we explore other
algorithms to mitigate this.
4
Conclusion
We have shown how adversarial learning can be used to improve fairness in deep neural networks and made observations
on the persistent tradeoff between fairness and performance. We further demonstrated that we can offset this tradeoff by
using the normal gradient descent algorithm with a modiﬁed update step.
Our project uses adversarial learning to ensure fairness, though there is scope for further research. We started by
applying a gradient descent-ascent to train both our adversary and classiﬁer, then improved our algorithm by applying a
regularizer to improve fairness of the model. Lastly, we optimized the gradient update step to remove the projection of
the gradient of the adversary from the gradient of the classiﬁer. This led us to ﬁnd an optimally-fair and accurate model.
5

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 11, 2021
Figure 4: GD (Gradient Descent) with Normal Update. Massive improvement in Model fairness as seen by the low
Adversary AUC of 0.44. Disadvantage is massive drop in accuracy to 83.9.
Figure 5: Normal GD with Modiﬁed Update. Here the threshold =61. The Model accuracy is increased to 88.1 while
maintaining fairness.
Ensuring fairness and accuracy is a difﬁcult task but with the huge traction fairness has gained in both academia and
industry, this work is promising. For future work, we propose that adversarial learning be explored in the context of
individual fairness, rather than group-fairness metrics, which we considered here.
——————–
