Cross-City Transfer Learning for Deep
Spatio-Temporal Prediction
Leye Wang∗
HKUST

Xu Geng∗
HKUST

Xiaojuan Ma
HKUST

Feng Liu
SAIC Motor

Qiang Yang
HKUST

Abstract
Spatio-temporal prediction is a key type of tasks in urban computing, e.g., trafﬁc
ﬂow and air quality. Adequate data is usually a prerequisite, especially when
deep learning is adopted. However, the development levels of different cities
are unbalanced, and still many cities suffer from data scarcity. To address the
problem, we propose a novel cross-city transfer learning method for deep spatio-
temporal prediction tasks, called RegionTrans. RegionTrans aims to effectively
transfer knowledge from a data-rich source city to a data-scarce target city. More
speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst learn an inter-city region matching function to match each
target city region to a similar source city region. A neural network is designed
to effectively extract region-level representation for spatio-temporal prediction.
Finally, an optimization algorithm is proposed to transfer learned features from the
source city to the target city with the region matching function. Using citywide
crowd ﬂow prediction as a demonstration experiment, we verify the effectiveness
of RegionTrans. Results show that RegionTrans can outperform the state-of-the-
art ﬁne-tuning deep spatio-temporal prediction models by reducing up to 10.7%
prediction error.
1
Introduction
Spatio-temporal prediction covers a broad scope of applications in urban computing [20], such as
trafﬁc and air quality prediction. Recently, with the development of big data techniques, deep learning
becomes popular in spatio-temporal prediction, e.g. crowd ﬂow, taxi demand, precipitation predic-
tions, and achieves state-of-the-art performance [7, 12, 18, 19]. However, the city development levels
are quite unbalanced, so that many cities cannot beneﬁt from such achievements due to data scarcity.
Hence, how to help data-scarce cities also obtain beneﬁts from the recent technique breakthroughs
like deep leaning, becomes an important research issue, while it is still under-investigated up to date.
To tackle this problem, in this paper, we propose a new cross-city transfer learning method for deep
spatio-temporal prediction tasks, called RegionTrans. The objective of RegionTrans is to predict
a certain type of service data (e.g., crowd ﬂow) in a data-scarce city (target city) by transferring
knowledge learned from a data-rich city (source city). The principal idea of RegionTrans is to ﬁnd
inter-city region pairs that share similar patterns and then use such region pairs as proxies to efﬁciently
transfer knowledge from the source city to the target.
∗Equal contribution
Preprint. Work in progress.
arXiv:1802.00386v2  [cs.AI]  19 May 2018

In literature, existing deep learning approaches are often designed to predict citywide phenomenon as
a whole [18, 19], and thus it is hard to enable region-level knowledge transfer. To this end, rather
than adopting the existing deep neural networks for citywide spatio-temporal prediction (e.g. ST-
ResNet [18]), we propose a novel deep transfer learning method. First, we design a region matching
function to link each target city region to a similar source region based on the short period of service
data or correlated auxiliary data if applicable. Then, in our proposed network structure, to catch
the spatio-temporal patterns hidden in the service data, ConvLSTM layers [12] are ﬁrstly stacked.
Afterward, to encode region representation, we newly add a Conv2D layer with 1 × 1 ﬁlter, which is
the key and fundamental component of our network to make region-level transfer feasible. Finally,
the discrepancy between region representations of the inter-city similar regions is minimized during
the network parameter learning for the target city, so as to enable region-level cross-city knowledge
transfer. With crowd ﬂow prediction as a showcase [18, 19], we verify the feasibility and effectiveness
of RegionTrans. Brieﬂy, this paper has the following contributions.
(i) To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work to study how to facilitate deep spatio-temporal
prediction in a data-scarce target city by transferring knowledge from a data-rich source city.
(ii) We propose a novel deep transfer learning method RegionTrans for spatio-temporal prediction
tasks by region-level cross-city transfer. RegionTrans ﬁrst computes inter-city region similarities,
and then stacks ConvLSTM and Conv2D (1 × 1 ﬁlter) layers to extract region-level representations
reﬂecting spatio-temporal patterns. Finally, the discrepancy of the representations of inter-city similar
regions is minimized so as to facilitate region-level cross-city knowledge transfer.
(iii) With crowd ﬂow prediction as a showcase, our experiment shows that RegionTrans can reduce up
to 10.7% prediction error compared to ﬁne-tuned state-of-the-art spatio-temporal prediction methods.
2
Related Work
Spatio-Temporal Prediction is a fundamental problem in urban computing [20]. Recently, deep
learning is adopted in spatio-temporal prediction tasks and becomes the state-of-the-art solution when
there exists a rich history of data. Various deep models have been used, e.g., CNN [19], ResNet [18],
and ConvLSTM [7, 12, 17]. Compared to these works, the difference of our work lies in both
objective and method. We aim to apply deep learning to a target city with a short period of service
data, and thus propose RegionTrans to effectively transfer knowledge from a data-rich source city to
the target city.
Transfer Learning addresses the machine learning problem when labeled training data is scarce [11].
In urban computing, data scarcity problem often exists when the targeted service or infrastructure is
new. There are generally two strategies to deal with urban data scarcity. The ﬁrst is using auxiliary
data of the target city to help build the targeted application. Examples include using temperature to
infer humidity and vice versa [14], and leveraging the taxi GPS traces to detect ridesharing cars [13].
The second is to ﬁnd a source city with adequate data to transfer knowledge. Guo et al. design a
cross-city transfer learning framework with collaborative ﬁltering and AutoEncoder to conduct chain
store site recommendation [3]. As our problem is prediction rather than recommendation, the method
in [3] cannot be applied. Another relevant work is [15], which proposes a cross-city transfer learning
algorithm FLORAL to predict air quality category. There are two difﬁculties to apply FLORAL
to our task: (1) many spatio-temporal prediction tasks are regression but FLORAL is designed for
classiﬁcation; (2) FLORAL is not designed for deep learning. As far as we know, RegionTrans is the
ﬁrst cross-city transfer learning framework for deep spatio-temporal prediction.
3
Problem Formulation
Deﬁnition 1. Region [19]. A city D is partitioned into WD ×HD equal-size grids (e.g., 1km×1km).
Each grid is called a region, denoted as r. We use r[i,j] to represent a city region whose coordinate is
[i, j]. The whole set of regions in a city D is denoted as CD.
Deﬁnition 2. Urban Image Time Series. We denote the set of data time-stamps of a city D as:
TD = [tc −TD + 1, tc]
(1)
where TD is the number of time-stamps and tc is the current/last time-stamp. For brevity, we consider
equal-length time-stamp (e.g., one-hour) as in the previous research [18, 19]. For a speciﬁc time-
2

stamp t, we have an urban image It,D with WD × HD pixels where each pixel represents certain
data of a corresponding region (Def. 1),
It,D = {ir,t|r ∈CD} ∈RWD×HD
(2)
Then, we deﬁne an urban image time series ID as follows:
ID = {It,D|t ∈TD} ∈RTD×WD×HD
(3)
In reality, a variety of urban data can be modeled as the above urban image time series, such as crowd
ﬂow, weather condition, air quality, etc.
Deﬁnition 3. Service Spatio-temporal Data. Service data is the targeted type of data to predict. We
deﬁne the service spatio-temporal data as the urban image time series SD storing the service data :
SD = {St,D|t ∈TD} = {sr,t|r ∈CD, t ∈TD} ∈RTD×WD×HD
(4)
where sr,t is the service data of region r at time-stamp t.
In this paper, the target city D suffers from the service data scarcity, while the source city D′ has rich
service data, i.e., |TD| ≪|TD′|. With this in mind, we formulate the problem.
Problem. Spatio-temporal Prediction by Cross-city Transfer. Given the little service data in
target city D and rich service data in source city D′, we aim to learn a function f to predict the
citywide service data in the target city D at the next time-stamp tc + 1:
min
f
error( eStc+1,D, Stc+1,D)
(5)
where
eStc+1,D = f(SD, SD′),
|TD| ≪|TD′|
(6)
The error metric may be mean absolute error, root mean squared error, etc., according to the real
application requirement.
Example. Crowd Flow Prediction. We use crowd ﬂow prediction [18, 19] as an example to illustrate
the above problem concretely. The service data SD is thus crowd inﬂow or outﬂow. The source city
crowd ﬂow records may last for several years (TD′), but the target city may have only a few days
(TD) as the service is just started. It is worth noting that external context factors, such as weather
and workday/weekend, are also important in crowd ﬂow prediction [18]. Later we will show that our
proposed method is easy to add the external features extracted from context factors.
4
RegionTrans
To solve the above problem, we propose a deep transfer learning method RegionTrans including three
stages. First, we learn an inter-city region matching function that links each target region to a similar
source region. Second, a neural network structure is designed to extract region-level spatio-temporal
patterns. Finally, an optimization process is proposed to facilitate region-level transfer between cities.
4.1
Inter-city Similar-region Matching
The ﬁrst step of RegionTrans is to ﬁnd a matching function M : CD →CD′ to map each region
of the target city D to a certain region of the source city D′. The objective is to ﬁnd the source
region having the similar spatio-temporal pattern with the target region. To this end, we propose two
strategies to ﬁnd M.
Matching with a short period of service data. While the target city has only a little service data,
this could still provide hints to build M. We focus on the time span when both source and target
cities have service data (i.e., TD), then calculate the correlations (e.g., Pearson coefﬁcient) between
each target region and source region with the corresponding service data. Finally, for each target
region, we choose the source region with the largest correlation value. Formally,
M(r) = r∗,
r ∈CD, r∗∈CD′
(7)
ρr,r∗≥ρr,r′,
∀r′ ∈CD′
(8)
ρr,r∗= corr({sr,t}, {sr∗,t}),
r ∈CD, r∗∈CD′, t ∈TD
(9)
3

ConvLSTM
ConvLSTM
Lr
+
Conv2D+×+
Conv2D+×+
𝐗.
/0.
Le
Feature 
Extraction
t-T+1
t-1
t
t+1
Loss
Replicate
Historical Service Data
External Context
Yt
~
Xt
Yt
BatchNorm
…
(a)
Conv2D 1×1
Citywide View
Yt
~
𝐗.
H/I
𝐗.
/0.
𝐗.
H/I
Region View
Dense
Yt[1,1]
~
𝐗.
H/I[𝟏,𝟏,: ]
𝐗.
/0.[𝟏,𝟏,: ]
(b)
Figure 1: Proposed network structure.
Matching with a long period of auxiliary data (if applicable). As there is little service data in the
target city, the above service-data-based correlation similarity between a source region and a target
region may not be very reliable. In reality, sometimes we can ﬁnd another openly-accessible auxiliary
data that correlates with the service data, which may help calculate the inter-city region similarity
more robustly. For example, to predict crowd ﬂow, public social media check-ins can be a useful
proxy according to literature [16]. That is, instead of the short period of crowd ﬂow data, we use the
long period of openly available check-in data to build the correlation between two regions.
ρr,r∗= corr({ar,t}, {ar∗,t}),
r ∈CD, r∗∈CD′, t ∈TA
(10)
where a is the auxiliary data (e.g., check-in number) lasting for a long period TA(|TA| ≫|TD|).
4.2
Deep Spatio-temporal Neural Network with Region Representations
Existing deep spatio-temporal models often take the whole city data for end-to-end prediction (e.g.,
ST-ResNet [18]), which cannot be used for region-level transfer. Therefore, we design a new network
for spatio-temporal prediction with region representations, as shown in Fig. 1 (a).
Input and output. First we illustrate the input and output of the proposed network2:
k ∈N+
as the length of the input time series
(11)
Xt = {St′|t′ ∈[t −k + 1, t]} ∈Rk×W ×H
as input for prediction
(12)
Yt = St+1 ∈RW ×H
as ground-truth result at time t + 1
(13)
fθ : Rk×W ×H →RW ×H
as neural network with parameter θ
(14)
eYt = fθ(Xt) ∈RW ×H
as prediction result at time t + 1
(15)
Our network objective is to minimize the squared error between predicted eYt and real Yt:
min
θ
X
t∈T
|| eYt −Yt||2
F
(16)
Network structure. ConvLSTM layers are used as the basic components for our neural network
to learn spatio-temporal patterns [12]. In the ﬁrst part of the network, we use a set of stacked
ConvLSTM layers to construct region-level hidden representation Xrep
t
∈RW ×H×Lr as deﬁned in
Eq. 17 (we will elaborate why this can be seen as region-level representation soon). After getting
Xrep
t
, we incorporate the external context factors into the network structure. External context factors
2For clarity, we omit the subscript D in notations as all the notations mentioned in this section is in city D.
4

are deﬁned as Xext
t
∈RW ×H×Le, which is a feature vector of length Le on each region (e.g.,
weather, temperature, weekday/holiday one-hot encoding [18]). By concatenating Xrep
t
and Xext
t
to form a representation ∈RW ×H×(Lr+Le), we employ several convolution 2D layers with 1 × 1
ﬁlters (Conv2D1×1 [9]) to predict the next-time-stamp service data eYt ∈RW ×H. Formally, the
spatio-temporal neural network can be formulated as follows:
fθ1 : Rk×W ×H →RW ×H×Lr
as ConvLSTM layers
(17)
fm : (RW ×H×Lr, RW ×H×Le) →RW ×H×(Lr+Le)
as merge layer
(18)
fθ2 : RW ×H×(Lr+Le) →RW ×H
as Conv2D1×1 layers
(19)
Xrep
t
= fθ1(Xt)
as region representation
(20)
eYt = fθ2(fm(Xrep
t
, Xext
t
)) = fθ2(fm(fθ1(Xt), Xext
t
))
as prediction output
(21)
Region representation. As visualized by Fig. 1 (b), Conv2D1×1 will produce spatio-invariant results,
which means hidden vector Xrep
t
[w, h, :] and prediction eYt[w, h] represent the spatio-temporal
representation and prediction result of region r[w,h], respectively. Compared with existing end-to-
end citywide deep spatio-temporal prediction models [18, 19] without such region-level hidden
representations, our network design has the following advantages for transfer learning:
(i) Fine-grained region-level transfer. With existing methods which consider the data of a city as a
whole for prediction, we can only transfer the knowledge from the whole source city to the target
(e.g., through ﬁne-tuning). If two cities are not similar in general, the transfer performance may
be poor. As our network incorporates region representation, we can make ﬁne-grained knowledge
transfer based on region similarity (the detailed algorithm in the next sub-section). As long as we can
ﬁnd similar region pairs between cities, the effective transfer may be conducted.
(ii) Transfer between cities with different sizes. Since our neural network structure can be seen from
region view (Fig. 1 (b)), even if two cities have different sizes (i.e. W, H), it is possible to train a
model on a source city and then transfer the learned network parameters to the target city at the region
level. However, with end-to-end network structures [18, 19], if we want to transfer a learned model
from the source city to the target by ﬁne-tuning, the two cities must be the same size.
4.3
Region-based Cross-city Network Parameter Optimization
With the proposed network structure, we train a deep model in the source city D′ with its rich
spatio-temporal service data. We denote θD′ as the network parameters learned from the source
city. Then, with θD′ as the pre-trained network parameters, we propose a region-based cross-city
optimization algorithm to reﬁne the network parameters on the target city D, considering a short
period TD of the service data in the target city D and the inter-city region matching function M.
When reﬁning the network parameter for the target city D, the ﬁrst objective is to minimize prediction
error on the target city:
min
θD
X
t∈TD
|| eYt −Yt||2
F
(22)
Given the matching function M, the second objective of our optimization is to minimize representa-
tion divergence between matched region pairs. More speciﬁcally, for each time-stamp t ∈TD, we try
to minimize the squared error between the network hidden representations of the target region and its
matched source region. Formally, the second objective is as follows:
min
θD
X
r∈CD
X
t∈TD
ρr,r∗· ||xrep
r,t −xrep
r∗,t||2, where r∗= M(r)
(23)
where xrep
r,t is the hidden representation of the target region r when the last input time-stamp is t;
xrep
r∗,t is the representation of the matched source region r∗; ρr,r∗is the correlation value calculated
between region pairs (Sec. 4.1), so that more similar pair will be assigned with larger weights in the
optimization. Then, combining the two objectives leads to the following optimization process:
min
θD
(1 −w)
X
t∈TD
|| eYt −Yt||2
F + w
X
r∈CD
X
t∈TD
ρr,r∗· ||xrep
r,t −xrep
r∗,t||2
(24)
5

Algorithm 1 Region-based cross-city network parameter optimization
Input:
θD′: Pre-trained network parameters on source city with a long period of service data
T RD: target city training data
T RD′: source city training data
M: inter-city similar-region matching function
Output:
θD: network parameters for the target city
1: Initialize network parameters: θ ←θD′
2: epoch ←0
3: while epoch ≤MAX_EPOCH do
4:
for t ∈TD do
5:
Get {Xt, Yt} ∈T RD
6:
Get corresponding {X′
t, Y′
t} ∈T RD′
7:
for r ∈CD do
8:
r∗←M(r) (note that r∗∈CD′)
9:
xrep
r∗,t ←region representation of network (θ) with input X′
t for source region r∗
10:
xrep
r,t ←region representation of network (θ) with input Xt for target region r
11:
end for
12:
end for
13:
θ ←arg min
θ
(1 −w)
X
t∈TD
|| e
Yt −Yt||2
F + w
X
r∈CD
X
t∈TD
ρr,r∗· ||xrep
r,t −xrep
r∗,t||2
14:
epoch ++
15: end while
16: θD ←θ
17: return θD
where w is the weight to trade off between minimizing the representation discrepancy or minimizing
the prediction error. Then, we can use state-of-the-art network parameter learning algorithms, such as
SGD and ADAM, to obtain the network parameter θD for the target city D according to Eq. 24 (the
network parameter θD′ learned in the source city D′ is used as the initialization values). The detailed
pseudo-code of the optimization process is summarized in Alg. 1.
4.4
Remark: Divide-Match-Transfer Principle
Here, we elaborate the key principle behind RegionTrans, which we term as divide-match-transfer.
That is, for the target city domain and the source city domain, instead of transferring knowledge
from the source to the target as a whole, we ﬁrst divide both domains into a set of regions, or called
sub-domains. Then, we build a matching between the target sub-domains and the source sub-domains.
Finally, with the matched cross-sub-domain pairs, we conduct the knowledge transfer. Previous
theoretical transfer learning studies [1, 2, 10] have proved that the feature distribution difference
between the source and target domains is a key factor impacting the transfer learning performance.
Then, if we can build a reasonable cross-sub-domain matching (i.e., the feature distribution difference
between the two matched sub-domains becomes smaller than the original two domains), it is probable
that we can improve the transfer learning performance. As this is an intuitive understanding of the
divide-match-transfer principle, we will theoretically study its properties in the future work.
With divide-match-transfer principle in mind, RegionTrans can be seen as its realization for spatio-
temporal prediction tasks. For a city, region is a natural and semantically meaningful dividing.
Matching is built on the available short period of service data, or a long period of correlated auxiliary
data (if applicable), to make the matched inter-city region pairs share similar spatio-temporal patterns.
Besides RegionTrans, we believe that the divide-match-transfer principle can further guide the design
of transfer learning algorithms for more tasks beyond spatio-temporal prediction.
5
Experiment: Crowd Flow Prediction
In the experiment, we use crowd ﬂow prediction, an important type of spatio-temporal prediction
tasks in urban computing [18, 19], to verify the effectiveness of RegionTrans.
6

5.1
Settings
Datasets. Following previous studies on crowd ﬂow [5, 18, 19], we use bike ﬂow data for evaluation.
Three bike ﬂow datasets collected from Washington D.C., Chicago, and New York City are used. Each
dataset covers a two-year period (2015-2016). In all the cities, the center area of 20km × 20km are
selected as the studied area. The area is split to 20 × 20 regions (i.e., each region is 1km × 1km).
For each evaluation scenario, we choose one city as the source city and another as the target. We
assume that the source city has all its historical crowd ﬂow data, but only a limited period of crowd
ﬂow data exists in the target city (e.g., one day). The last two-month data is chosen for testing.
Metric. The evaluation metric is root mean square error (RMSE). Same as [18], the reported RMSE
is the average RMSE of inﬂow and outﬂow.
Network Implementation. Our network structure implemented in the experiment has two layers
of ConvLSTM with 5 × 5 ﬁlters and 32 hidden states, to generate Xrep
t
∈R20×20×32. With Xrep
t
as the input, there is one layer of Conv2D1×1 with 32 hidden states, followed by another layer
of Conv2D1×1 linking to the output crowd ﬂow prediction. For the external context factors, e.g.,
temperature, wind speed, weather, and day type, we use the same feature extraction method as [18]
and obtain an external feature vector with a length of 28. We also need to set w in Eq. 24 to balance
the optimization trade-off between representation difference and prediction error. We set w to 0.75 as
the default value. ADAM is used as the optimization algorithm [8].
Methods. For RegionTrans, we implement two variants:
• RegionTrans (S-Match): learning the inter-city region matching function M only by the
short period of the target city Service data, i.e., crowd ﬂow.
• RegionTrans (A-Match): learning the inter-city region matching function M by the long
period of the Auxiliary data, i.e., Foursquare check-in data. We use one-year check-in data
as the auxiliary data since it is a useful indication of crowd ﬂow, as shown in previous stud-
ies [16]. Note that we have collected check-in data from D.C. and Chicago, so RegionTrans
(A-Match) is available for the knowledge transfer between D.C. ⇌Chicago.
We compare RegionTrans with two types of baselines. The ﬁrst type only uses the short crowd data
history of target city for training its prediction model:
• ARIMA: a widely-used time series prediction method in statistics [6].
• DeepST [19]: a deep spatio-temporal neural network based on convolutional network. The
complete DeepST model has three components: closeness, period, and trend. But the period
and trend components can only be activated if the training data last for more than one day
and seven days, respectively. Therefore, if the target city does not have enough data, we
have to deactivate the corresponding components.
• ST-ResNet [18]: a deep spatio-temporal neural network based on residual network [4]. Same
as DeepST, ST-ResNet has three components. We then adapt ST-ResNet in the same way as
DeepST in our experiments.
The second type trains a deep model on the source city data, and ﬁne-tune it with the target city data:
• DeepST (FT): ﬁne-tuned DeepST.
• ST-ResNet (FT): ﬁne-tuned ST-ResNet.
As mentioned in Sec. 4.2, DeepST and ST-ResNet predict the city crowd ﬂow as a whole, and thus we
cannot ﬁne tune their models between two cities of different sizes. Therefore, to make the comparison
possible, our experiment selects the same area size for two cities. Note that RegionTrans is able to
transfer knowledge between two cities of different sizes, and thus is more ﬂexible.
5.2
Results
Comparison with baselines. Table 1 shows our results for D.C. ⇌Chicago and D.C. ⇌NYC.
In all the scenarios, RegionTrans can consistently outperform the best baseline, where the largest
improvement is reducing the prediction error by up to 10.7%. In particular, when the recorded
7

Table 1: Evaluation results. The target city holds 1 or 3-day crowd ﬂow historical data. RegionTrans
(A-Match) is available for D.C. ⇌Chicago as we have collected check-in data for Chicago and D.C.
D.C.→Chicago
Chicago→D.C.
D.C.→NYC
NYC→D.C.
1-day
3-day
1-day
3-day
1-day
3-day
1-day
3-day
Target Data Only
ARIMA
0.740
0.694
0.707
0.661
0.360
0.341
0.707
0.661
DeepST
0.771
0.711
1.075
0.767
0.350
0.359
1.075
0.767
ST-ResNet
0.914
0.703
0.869
0.738
0.376
0.349
0.869
0.738
Source & Target Data
DeepST (FT)
0.652
0.611
0.672
0.619
0.363
0.369
0.713
0.711
ST-ResNet (FT)
0.667
0.615
0.695
0.623
0.385
0.349
0.696
0.691
RegionTrans (S-Match)
0.605
0.594
0.631
0.602
0.328
0.305
0.665
0.593
RegionTrans (A-Match)
0.587
0.576
0.600
0.581
/
/
/
/
0.54
0.56
0.58
0.6
0.62
0.64
1-day
3-day
RMSE
w=0
w=1/2
w=2/3
w=3/4
Figure 2: Tunning w of RegionTrans (A-Match, D.C. →Chicago).
history of the target city is shorter, the improvement of RegionTrans is usually more signiﬁcant.
This indicates that the introduced inter-city similar-region pairs are valuable for transfer learning
especially when target data is extremely scarce. Between two variants of RegionTrans, RegionTrans
(A-Match) is better, as shown in D.C. ⇌Chicago. This implies that if an appropriate type of auxiliary
data exists, it is possible to build a better inter-city region matching than only using the short period
of the service data. If the auxiliary data is unavailable, using the limited period of service data for
region matching can still lead to the competitive variant RegionTrans (S-Match), which beats all the
baselines signiﬁcantly.
Another important observation is that RegionTrans is more robust when transferring knowledge
between two dissimilar cities than baselines. Between the three cities in the experiment, D.C. and
Chicago are similar in population, while NYC has a much larger population. This indicates that the
knowledge transfer between D.C. ⇌Chicago may be easier, while D.C. ⇌NYC could be harder.
Our results also verify this as DeepST and ST-ResNet get large improvement by ﬁne-tuning in D.C.
⇌Chicago; but in D.C. →NYC, negative transfer appears for the ﬁne-tuned DeepST and ST-ResNet,
leading to even worse performance than ARIMA, indicating that directly transferring the whole city
knowledge from D.C. to NYC is ineffective. In comparison, RegionTrans consistently achieves lower
error than all the baselines, verifying that the knowledge from D.C. can still be effectively transferred
to NYC. The primary reason that RegionTrans can avoid negative transfer is that although D.C. and
NYC are dissimilar in general, we can still ﬁnd inter-city region pairs with similar spatio-temporal
patterns (e.g., central business district) to facilitate cross-city knowledge transfer.
Tuning w. We tune w in Eq. 24 to see how it will affect the performance. The larger w is, the
higher weight is put on minimizing the similar-region representation difference. Fig. 2 shows the
results. If we set w = 0, i.e., ignoring the inter-city similar-region representation in transfer learning,
the performance is signiﬁcantly worse than when w > 0, by incurring up to 5% higher error. This
highlights the effectiveness of our proposed inter-city similar-region matching scheme in cross-city
knowledge transfer. For other settings of w > 0, the performance difference is minor. A larger w
performs slightly better when we have a very short period of target city crowd ﬂow data, e.g., one day.
Computation time. The experiment platform is equipped with Intel Xeon CPU E5-2650L, 128
GB RAM, and Nvidia Tesla M60 GPU. We implement RegionTrans with TensorFlow in CentOS.
Training the source city model on two years of data needs about 20 minutes, and the transfer learning
for the target city model costs about 50 and 100 minutes for 1 and 3-day data, respectively. This
running time efﬁciency is acceptable in real-life deployments.
8

6
Conclusion
In this paper, to address the data scarcity issue in spatio-temporal prediction tasks in urban computing,
we propose a novel cross-city deep transfer learning framework, called RegionTrans, with three
stages. (1) We use a short period of service data, or a long period of auxiliary data if applicable, to
obtain inter-city region similarities regarding the spatio-temporal dynamics. (2) We design a deep
spatio-temporal model with a hidden layer dedicated to storing region-level latent representations.
(3) We propose a network parameter optimization algorithm to transfer knowledge from a source city
to a target one by considering the latent representations of the inter-city similar-region pairs.
In the future, we plan to extend RegionTrans in several directions. First, we will try to theoretically
analyze the properties of RegionTrans and the divide-match-transfer principle behind it. Apparently,
the transfer learning performance depends on how good the matching of the target regions and the
source regions is; hence, mathematically modeling the relationship between the quality of matching
and the ﬁnal transfer performance will be our primary future work. Second, we will consider a more
general scenario where multiple data-rich source cities are available. Better performance may be
achieved if we can combine transferable knowledge from multi-source cities. Finally, we plan to
extend RegionTrans to spatio-temporal learning tasks besides prediction, e.g., facility deployment.
