A Probabilistic Framework for Location Inference from Social
Media
Yujie Qian
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Jie Tang
Tsinghua University

Zhilin Yang
Carnegie Mellon University

Binxuan Huang
Carnegie Mellon University

Wei Wei
Carnegie Mellon University

Kathleen M. Carley
Carnegie Mellon University

ABSTRACT
We study the extent to which we can infer users’ geographical
locations from social media. Location inference from social me-
dia can benefit many applications, such as disaster management,
targeted advertising, and news content tailoring. The challenges,
however, lie in the limited amount of labeled data and the large
scale of social networks. In this paper, we formalize the problem of
inferring location from social media into a semi-supervised factor
graph model (SSFGM). The model provides a probabilistic frame-
work in which various sources of information (e.g., content and
social network) can be combined together. We design a two-layer
neural network to learn feature representations, and incorporate
the learned latent features into SSFGM. To deal with the large-scale
problem, we propose a Two-Chain Sampling (TCS) algorithm to
learn SSFGM. The algorithm achieves a good trade-off between ac-
curacy and efficiency. Experiments on Twitter and Weibo show that
the proposed TCS algorithm for SSFGM can substantially improve
the inference accuracy over several state-of-the-art methods. More
importantly, TCS achieves over 100× speedup comparing with tra-
ditional propagation-based methods (e.g., loopy belief propagation).
KEYWORDS
Location Inference, Social Media, Factor Graph Model
1
INTRODUCTION
In social media platforms, such as Twitter, Facebook, and Weibo,
location is a important demographic attribute to support friend and
message recommendation [5, 33]. For example, statistics show that
the average number of friends between users from the same time
zone is about 50 times higher than the number between users with
a distance of three time zones [18]. This geographical information,
however, is usually unavailable. Cheng et al. [8] show that only
26.0% of users on Twitter input their locations. Furthermore, of the
locations that are user-supplied, many are ambiguous or incorrect.
Twitter, Facebook, and Weibo have functionalities allowing per-
tweet geo-tags; however, it turns out that only 0.42% of all tweets
contain a geo-tag [8].
In this work, we aim to find an effective and efficient way to
automatically infer users’ geographical locations from social media
data. Different from previous works [5, 8, 29] that deal with this
problem in a specific scenario (e.g., determining the US cities only)
or with specific data (e.g., Twitter), we propose a method that is
general enough to apply to diverse scenarios. This brings several
new challenges:
• Limited labeled data. Only a small portion of users have
the location information, and all the others are unlabeled. It
is necessary to design a principled way to learn with both
labeled and large unlabeled data.
• Large-scale network. Our problem has strong network cor-
relation, but how to leverage the correlation, particularly in
a large-scale network is challenging.
• Model flexibility. The proposed model should be flexible
enough in oder to be easily generalized to other scenarios and
to incorporate various information (e.g., content, structure
and deep features).
Previous work on location inference. The location inference
problem has been studied by researchers from different commu-
nities. Surveys of location inference techniques on Twitter and
related data challenges can be found in [2, 15, 22]. Roughly speak-
ing, existing literature can be divided into two categories. The first
category of research focuses on studying content. For example,
Cheng et al. [8] and Han et al. [14] used a probabilistic framework
and illustrated how to find local words and overcome tweet spar-
sity. Eisenstein et al. [10] proposed the Geographic Topic Model to
predict a user’s geo-location from text and topics. Ryoo et al. [39]
applied a similar idea to a Korean Twitter dataset. Ikawa et al. [19]
used a rule-based approach to predict a user’s current location based
on former tweets. Wing et al. [41] and Roller et al. [38] proposed
information retrieval approaches with geographic grids. The other
line of research infers user locations using network structure infor-
mation. For example, Backstrom et al. [5] assumed that an unknown
user would be co-located with one of their friends and sought the
location with the maximum probability. McGee et al. [30] integrated
social tie strengths between users to improve location estimation.
Jurgens [21] and Davis Jr et al. [44] used the idea of label propa-
gation to infer user locations according to their network distances
from users with known locations. These methods, however, do not
consider content. Li et al. [29] proposed a unified discriminative
influence model and utilized both the content and the social net-
work, but they focused on the US users and only considered the
mentioned location names in tweets. Rahimi et al. [35, 36] used a
simple hybrid approach to combine predictions from content and
network. Recently, Miura et al. [32] proposed a recurrent neural
network model for learning content representations and integrated
the user network embeddings. Another study using user profiles
can be found in [44]. Table 1 summarizes the most related works
on location inference. However, all the aforementioned methods
cannot solve all the challenges listed above.
arXiv:1702.07281v3  [cs.AI]  10 May 2019

Table 1: Summary of previous studies on geo-location infer-
ence in social media.
Features
Authors
Scope
Language
Object
Content
Cheng et al. [8]
US
All
User
Han et al. [14]
World
English
User
Eisenstein et al. [10]
US
All
User
Ryoo et al. [39]
Korea
Korean
User
Ikawa et al. [19]
Japan
Japanese
Tweet
Wing et al. [41]
US
English
User
Roller et al. [38]
US
English
User
Network
Backstrom et al. [5]
World
All
User
McGee et al. [30]
World
All
User
Jurgens [21]
World
All
User
Davis Jr et al. [9]
World
All
User
Content +
Network
Li et al. [29]
US
English
User
Miura et al. [32]
World
English
User
Profile
Zubiaga et al. [44]
World
All
Tweet
Problem formulation. We now give a formalization to precisely
define the problem we are dealing with. Without loss of generality,
our input can be considered as a partially labeled network G =
(V, E, X,Y L) derived from the social media data. V denotes a set
of |V | = N users, V L ⊂V denotes a subset of labeled users (with
locations), V U = V \ V L indicates the subset of unlabeled users
(without locations), E ⊆V × V is the set of relationships between
users, Y L corresponds to the locations of users in V L, and X is
the feature matrix associated with users in V , where each row
corresponds to a user and each column corresponds to a feature.
Given the input, the problem of inferring user locations can be
defined as follows:
Problem 1. Geo-location Inference. Given a partially labeled
network G = (V, E, X,Y L), the objective is to learn a predictive func-
tion F in order to predict the locations of unlabeled users V U
F : G = (V, E, X,Y L) →YU
(1)
where YU is the set of predicted locations for unlabeled users V U .
It is worth noting that our formulation of user location inference
is slightly different from that in the aforementioned work. The task
is defined as a semi-supervised learning problem for networked
data — we have a network with limited labeled nodes and a large
number of unlabeled nodes. Our goal is to leverage both local
attributes X and network structure E to learn the predictive function
F . Moreover, we assume that all predicted locations are among the
locations occurring in the labeled setY L. It is also worth mentioning
that a user may have multiple locations; here we focus on predicting
one’s primary location (e.g., home or the location in one’s profile).
Our solution and contributions. In this paper, we propose a
probabilistic framework based on factor graphs to address the loca-
tion inference problem. However, it is infeasible to directly apply
traditional factor graphs, due to the new challenges in our problem.
Our goal is to achieve a good trade-off between the accuracy and
efficiency, and also to make the model scalable to large networks.
Our contributions in this work can be summarized as follows:
• We present a semi-supervised factor graph model (SSFGM),
which learns to infer user locations using both labeled and
unlabeled data.
• By incorporating network structures and deep feature rep-
resentations, SSFGM substantially improves the inference
accuracy over several state-of-the-art methods.
• We propose a Two-Chain Sampling (TCS) algorithm to learn
the SSFGM. TCS achieves over 100× speedup comparing
with the traditional loopy belief propagation method. All
codes and data used in this work are publicly available.1
We conduct systematic experiments on different genres of datasets,
including Twitter and Weibo. The results show that the proposed
model significantly improves the location inference accuracy. In
terms of the time cost for model training, the proposed TCS al-
gorithm is very efficient and requires only less than two hours of
training on million-scale networks.
2
PROBABILISTIC FRAMEWORK
In this section, we propose a semi-supervised framework based on
factor graphs for location inference from social media.
2.1
Semi-supervised Factor Graph (SSFGM)
Basic intuitions. For inferring user locations, we have three basic
intuitions. First, the user’s profile may contain implicit information
about the user’s location, such as the time zone and the language
selected by the user. Second, the tweets posted by a user may reveal
the user’s location. For example, Table 2 lists the most popular “local”
words in five English-speaking countries. These words include cities
(Melbourne, Dublin), organizations (HealthSouth, UMass), sports
(hockey, rugby), local idiom (Ctfu, wyd, lad), etc. Third, network
structure can be very helpful for geo-location inference. In Twit-
ter, for example, users can follow each other, retweet each other’s
tweets, and mention other users in their tweets. The principle of
homophily [27] — “birds of a feather flock together” [31] — sug-
gests that these “connected” users may come from the same place.
This tendency was observed between Twitter reciprocal friends
in [18, 26]. Moreover, we found that the homophily phenomenon
also exists in the mention network. Table 3 shows the statistics
for US, UK, and China Twitter users. We can see that when user A

same country is significantly higher than that they come from dif-
ferent countries. Interestingly, when a US user A mentions another
user B in Twitter, the chance that user B is also from the US is 95% ,
while if user A comes from the UK, the probability sharply drops
to 85%, and further drops to 80% for users from China. We also did
statistics on the US users at state-level and found that there is an
82.13% chance that users A and B come from the same state if one
mentions the other in her/his tweets.
Model illustration. Based on the above intuitions, we propose a
Semi-Supervised Factor Graph Model (SSFGM) for location infer-
ence. Figure 1 shows the graphical representation of the SSFGM.
1https://github.com/thomas0809/SSFGM
2

Input: Partially Labeled Network
Observations
Latent Variables
Semi-Supervised Factor Graph Model
f(x5, y5)
f(x1, y1)
h(y3, y5)
h(y4, y5)
f(x2, y2)
f(x3, y3)
f(x4, y4)
h(y3, y4)
h(y2, y3)
h(y1, y2)
v1
v2
v3
v4
v5
China
USA
USA
unknown
unknown
y1
y1=?
y3
y4
y5
y2
y2=China
y3=?
y4=USA
y5=USA
g(x1, y1)
g(x2, y2)
g(x3, y3)
g(x4, y4)
g(x5, y5)
x3
x2
x1
x4
x5
y
x
attribute
deep
f(x, y)
g(x, y)
x
Figure 1: Graphical representation of the proposed Semi-Supervised Factor Graph Model (SSFGM).
Table 2: Popular location indicative words in tweets posted
by users from different countries.
Country
US
UK
Canada
Australia
Ireland
Top-10
words*
HealthSouth Leeds
Calgary
Melbourne
Dublin
UMass
Used
Toronto
Sydney
Ireland
Montefiore
Railway
Vancouver
Australia
Irish
Ctfu
xxxx
Ontario
9am
Hum
ACCIDENT
whilst
Canadian
Type
lads
Panera
listed
Canada
℃
lad
MINOR
Xx
BC
hPa
xxx
wyd
Xxx
hockey
Centre
rugby
Kindred
tbh
Available
ESE
Xxx
hmu
xx
NB
mm
xxxx
* Top-10 by mutual information [42], among the words occurred > 5000 times.

User A
US
UK
China
User B
US
95.05 %
UK
85.69 %
China
80.37 %
Indonesia
0.77 %
US
5.12 %
Indonesia
7.89 %
UK
0.75 %
Nigeria
3.03 %
US
5.97 %
Canada
0.61 %
Indonesia
1.00 %
Korea
0.96 %
Mexico
0.27 %
Ireland
0.49 %
Japan
0.71 %
The graphical model SSFGM consists of two kinds of variables:
observations {x} and latent variables {y}. In our problem, each
user vi corresponds to an observation xi and is also associated
with a latent variable yi. The observation xi represents the user’s
personal attributes and tweet content, and the latent variable yi
represents the user’s location. In this paper, we consider location
inference as a classification problem, i.e., yi ∈{1, . . . ,C} which can
be the user’s country, state, or city, and C is the number of possible
location categories. We denote Y = {y1,y2, . . . ,yN }, and Y can be
divided into a labeled set Y L and an unlabeled set YU . The latent
variables {yi }i=1, ···,N are correlated with each other, representing
the social relationships between users. In SSFGM, such correlations
can be defined as factor functions.
Now we explain the SSFGM in detail. Given a partially labeled
network as input, we define two factor functions:
• Attribute factor: f (xi,yi) represents the relationship be-
tween observation (features) xi and the latent variable yi;
• Correlation factor: h(yi,yj) denotes the correlation be-
tween the locations of users vi and vj.
The factor functions can be instantiated in different ways. In
this paper, we define the attribute factor as an exponential-linear
function
f (xi,yi) = exp  α⊤Φ(xi,yi)
Φk(xi,yi) = 1(yi = k) xi,
k ∈{1, . . . ,C}
(2)
whereα = (α1, · · · ,αC)⊤is the weighting vector, Φ = (Φ1, · · · , ΦC)⊤
is the vector of feature functions, and 1(yi = k) is an indicator func-
tion which is equal to 1 when yi = k and 0 otherwise.
The correlation factor is defined as
h(yi,yj) = exp  γ ⊤Ω(yi,yj)
(3)
where γ is also a weighting vector, and Ωrepresents feature func-
tions Ωkl(yi,yj) = 1(yi = k,yj = l) wij, wij can be any features
associated with users vi and vj, such as the number of interactions.
Correlation can be directed (e.g., mention), or undirected (e.g., re-
ciprocal follow, Facebook friend). For undirected correlation, we
need to guarantee γkl = γlk in the model.
Model enhancement with deep factors. We introduce how to
utilize deep neural networks to enhance the proposed SSFGM. It
also demonstrates the flexibility of the model. We incorporate a
deep factor д(xi,yi) in SSFGM to represent the deep (non-linear)
association between xi and yi. The right side of Figure 1 illustrates
3

how we combine the predefined attributes and the deep factor in
SSFGM.
Specifically, our deep factor is a two-layer neural network. The
input vector x is fed into a neural network with two fully-connected
layers, denoted h1(x) and h2(x):
h1(x) = ReLU(W1x + b1)
h2(x) = ReLU(W2h1(x) + b2)
(4)
where W1, W2, b1, b2 are parameters of the neural network, and
we use ReLU(x) = max(0,x) [13] as the activation function. Similar
to the definition of attribute factor, we define
д(xi,yi) = exp  β⊤Ψ(xi,yi)
Ψk(xi,yi) = 1(yi = k) h2(xi),
k ∈{1, . . . ,C}
(5)
where β is the weighting vector for the output of the neural net-
work.
Thus, we define the following joint distribution over Y:
p(Y |X) = 1
Z
Ö
vi ∈V
f (xi,yi)д(xi,yi)
Ö
(vi,vj)∈E
h(yi,yj)
(6)
where Z is the normalization factor that ensures Í
Y p(Y |X) = 1.
Feature Definitions. For the attribute factor, we define two cate-
gories of features: profile and content.
Profile features include information from the user profiles,
such as time zone, user-selected language, gender, age, number of
followers and followees, etc.
Content features capture the characteristics of tweet content.
The easiest way to define content features is using a bag-of-words
representation. But it suffers from sparsity and high dimensionality,
especially in Twitter, which has hundreds of languages.
In our work, we employ Mutual Information (MI) [42] to rep-
resent the content. Given a word w and a location c, the Mutual
Information between them is computed as
MI(w,c) = log p(w,c)
p(w)p(c) ≈log
count(w,c) · n
count(w) · count(c)
(7)
where count(w,c) is the number of tweets which are posted at
locationc and contain the wordw, count(w) is the number of tweets
containing word w, count(c) is the number of tweets posted at
location c, and n is the total amount of tweets in the training data.
We pre-compute the MI between each word and each location using
the training corpus, and define the content features for each user as
the aggregated MI. We use two aggregation approaches, max and
averaдe, i.e.,
MImax(v,c) =
max
w ∈T (v) MI(w,c)
MIaveraдe(v,c) =
1
|T(v)|
Õ
w ∈T (v)
MI(w,c)
(8)
where T(v) represents all the words from the tweets posted by user
v. Then we use the aggregated MIs as the input content features
for our model.
2.2
Two-Chain Sampling (TCS) Learning
Now we introduce how to tackle the learning problem in SSFGM.
We first start with the learning objective and gradient derivation,
and then propose our Two-Chain Sampling algorithm.
Learning objective and gradient derivation. Learning a Semi-
Supervised Factor Graph Model involves two parts: learning pa-
rameters α, β,γ for the graphical model, and learning parameters
W, b for the neural network of the deep factor. In this paper, we
learn the two parts jointly.
We follow the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) to learn
the graphical model. For notation simplicity, we rewrite the joint
probability (Eq. 6) as
p(Y |X) = 1
Z
Ö
i
exp  θ⊤s(yi) = 1
Z exp  θ⊤S(Y)
(9)
where θ = (α⊤, β⊤,γ ⊤)⊤are the factor graph model parameters
to estimate, s(yi) = (Φ(xi,yi)⊤, Ψ(xi,yi)⊤, Í
yj Ω(yi,yj)⊤)⊤, and
S(Y) = Í
i s(yi). The input of SSFGM is partially labeled, which
makes the model learning very challenging. The general idea here
is to maximize the marginal likelihood of labeled data. We denote
Y |Y L as the label configuration that satisfies all the known labels.
Then we can define the following MLE objective function O(θ):
O(θ) = logp(Y L|X) = log
Õ
Y |Y L
1
Z exp(θ⊤S)
= log
Õ
Y |Y L
exp(θ⊤S) −log
Õ
Y
exp(θ⊤S)
(10)
Now the learning problem is cast as finding the best parameter
configuration that maximizes the objective function, i.e.,
ˆθ = arg max
θ
logp(Y L|X)
(11)
We can use gradient descent to solve this optimization problem.
First, we derive the gradient of parameter θ:
∂O(θ)
∂θ
=
Í
Y |Y L exp(θ⊤S) · S
Í
Y |Y L exp(θ⊤S)
−
Í
Y exp(θ⊤S) · S
Í
Y exp(θ⊤S)
= Epθ (Y |Y L,X)[S] −Epθ (Y |X)[S]
(12)
In order to learn the neural network parameters in the deep
factor, we derive the gradients of the top layer of the neural network
similarly to Eq. 12, and then follow the standard backpropagation
algorithm to update the parameters. Similar methods have been
studied in [4]; we mainly discuss how to learn the graphical model
in the following.
In Eq. 12, the gradient is equal to the difference of two expecta-
tions under two different distributions. The first one — pθ (Y |Y L, X)
— is the model distribution conditioned on labeled data, and the
second — pθ (Y |X) — is the unconditional model distribution. Both
of them are intractable and cannot be computed directly [40]. We
will illustrate how to deal with this challenge in the rest of the
section.
Loopy Belief Propagation (LBP) [34]. A traditional approach
is LBP, an algorithm for approximately estimating marginal proba-
bilities in graphical models. It performs message passing between
variable nodes and factor nodes according to the sum-product rule
[25]. In each step of gradient descent, we need to perform LBP
twice to estimate pθ (Y |X) and pθ (Y |Y L, X) respectively, and then
calculate the gradient according to Eq. 12.
However, the LBP-based learning algorithm is computationally
expensive. Its time complexity is O(I1I2(|V |C + |E|C2)), where I1 is
4

the number of iterations for gradient descent, I2 is the number of
iterations for loopy belief propagation, and C is the number of the
location categories (usually 30-200). This algorithm is very time-
consuming, and not applicable especially when we have millions
of users and edges.
Softmax Regression (SR). We try to solve the learning challenge
in large-scale factor graphs. It is difficult to calculate the joint
probability Eq. 9 because of the normalization factor Z, which
sums over all the possible configurations of Y. However, if we only
consider a single variable yi and assume all the other variables
are fixed, its conditional probability can be easily calculated by a
softmax function,
p(yi |X,Y \ {yi }) =
exp  θ⊤s(yi)
Í
y′
i exp

θ⊤s(y′
i)

(13)
Eq. 13 has the same form as softmax regression (also called multi-
nomial logistic regression). The difference is that the neighborhood
information is captured in feature function s(yi). Softmax regres-
sion can be trained using gradient descent, and the gradient is much
easier to compute than factor graph models. We then design an
approximate learning algorithm based on softmax regression:
Step 1. Conduct softmax regression to learnα and β, with labeled
data {(xi,yi)|yi ∈Y L} only;2
Step 2. Predict the labels YU for unlabeled users;
Step 3. Conduct softmax regression to learnθ according to Eq. 13;
Step 4. Predict the labelsYU for unlabeled users. If the prediction
accuracy on the validation set increases, go to Step 3;
otherwise, stop.
This algorithm is an efficient approximation method for learning
SSFGM, but its performance can be further improved. We can use SR
to initialize the model parameters for the other learning algorithms.
Two-Chain Sampling (TCS). Now we introduce the proposed
TCS algorithm, a novel Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method
[3], for efficiently learning SSFGM. MCMC has been proven suc-
cessful in learning complex graphical models. For example, Rohani-
manesh et al. proposed the SampleRank algorithm to train factor
graphs [37]. However, SampleRank has some shortcomings. It ac-
tually optimizes an alternative max-margin objective instead of
the original maximum likelihood objective. In addition, it relies on
an external metric (e.g., accuracy), which could be arbitrary and
engineering-oriented, since multiple metrics are often available for
evaluation.
We propose a new method to directly optimize the maximum
likelihood objective (Eq. 10) without using additional heuristic met-
rics. We refer to this algorithm as Two-Chain Sampling, summarized
in Algorithm 1. The key idea behind TCS is that we generate two
Markov chains, and in each sampling step, we use a similar ap-
proach as that of contrastive divergence (CD) [17] to compute the
gradient.
Mathematically, the gradient we are estimating (Eq. 12) consists
of two expectation terms. To obtain an unbiased estimation, we con-
struct two Markov chains Y1 and Y2. Specifically, we sample Y1 from
pdata = pθ (Y |X,Y L) and sample Y2 from pmodel = pθ (Y |X). Various
2Here we assume p(yi |xi) = softmax  α ⊤Φ(xi, yi) + β ⊤Ψ(xi, yi).
Algorithm 1: Two-Chain Sampling (TCS)
Input
:G = (V, E), X,Y L, learning rate η;
Output:learned parameters θ;
1 Initialize θ randomly;
2 Initialize Y1 with Y L fixed, and YU randomly;
3 Initialize Y2 randomly;
4 repeat
5
Randomly split V to mini-batches {B1, . . . , BK };
6
for k = 1, 2, . . . ,K do
7
Initialize the gradient δ ←0;
8
for vi ∈Bk do
9
Sample yi in Y1 such that Y1 ∼pθ (Y |X,Y L);
10
Sample yi in Y2 such that Y2 ∼pθ (Y |X);
11
if yi ∈Y L then
12
δ ←δ + s(yi |Y1) −E[s(yi)|Y2\{yi }];
13
else
14
δ ←δ + E[s(yi)|Y1\{yi }] −E[s(yi)|Y2\{yi }];
15
θ ←θ + η · δ;
16
Evaluate on the validation set;
17 until early stopping criteria satisfied;
samplers could be applied here. We choose Gibbs sampling [12] in
this work. 3 In each sampling step, Gibbs sampling updates a single
variable yi while the other variables are fixed. In other words, we
sample yi according to the distribution we have defined in Eq. 13,
but use the neighbours’ values from Y1 and Y2 respectively in the
two chains. It should also be noted that when we update yi of a
labeled user in the chain Y1 (i.e., yi ∈Y L), its value should never
be changed from its true label. Since Y1 follows pθ (Y |X,Y L), all the
known labels must be fixed.
It is non-trivial to calculate the gradient in the sampling process.
A standard way is to keep sampling for a number of iterations and
then use the resulting distribution to approximately compute the
expectation value. However, the MCMC method typically requires
too many iterations to reach convergence, which makes it not
applicable in training large factor graph models. Fortunately, as
suggested by the contrastive divergence algorithm [17], we do
not have to wait for the convergence but usually a few sampling
steps (or even one step) can be effective enough. Besides, bearing
a similar merit to stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [6], we can
sample only a small subset of variables each time instead of all
of them. Thus we first randomly split the user set into some fix-
sized mini-batches. In each step, we sample the variables yi in a
mini-batch, compute the gradient, and update the parameters. The
gradient can be approximated as Í
i s(yi |Y1) −s(yi |Y2), where the
summation is taken over the mini-batch. Empirically, it is a feasible
solution, but the learning process sometimes becomes unstable. To
improve learning stability, we change the gradient computation to
Í
i E[s(yi)|Y1\{yi }] −E[s(yi)|Y2\{yi }], i.e., the expectations under
the distribution Eq. 13. Again, the first expectation value is simply
s(yi |Y1) if yi is a known label. We have explicitly indicated it in
3We also tried some other sampling methods such as Metropolis-Hastings sampling
[16], and finally chose Gibbs sampling because of its efficiency.
5

Algorithm 1 with the “if-then-else” statement. In practice, it is
usually necessary to downsample the unlabeled data if they are
significantly more than the labeled data.
We use the early stopping technique to determine when to stop
training. Specifically, we divide the labeled data into a training set
and a validation set. During the learning process, we only use the
labels in the training set. We evaluate the model after each epoch (a
complete pass through the dataset), and if the prediction accuracy
on the validation set does not increase for ε epochs, we stop the
algorithm and return the parameter configuration ˆθ that achieves
the best accuracy on the validation set. ε is a hyperparameter.
Compared with LBP and SR, the TCS algorithm directly optimizes
the MLE objective, and is very time-efficient. Focusing on the semi-
supervised learning setting on a partially labeled factor graph, we
simultaneously maintain two Markov chains and provide an elegant
way to perform gradient estimation.
Parallel learning. To scale up the proposed model to handle
large networks, we have developed parallel learning algorithms
for SSFGM. For the SR algorithm, softmax regression can be eas-
ily parallelized. The gradient is a summation over all the training
instances (or a mini-batch if using SGD), and the computation is
independent. For TCS, we can still parallelize the computation of
the instances in a mini-batch. The only difference is that instead
of sampling the variables one by one in the sequential setting, we
sample a mini-batch of variables simultaneously in the parallel set-
ting. This variation is usually called the blocked Gibbs sampler [20]
and will not change the original properties of Gibbs sampling.
Prediction. SSFGM is learned in a semi-supervised way — both
labeled and unlabeled instances are taken as input in the training
process. After learning the parameters, we predict the labels of unla-
beled instances. Alternatively, we can also apply the learned SSFGM
in a inductive setting, i.e., to predict future unknown instances.
For prediction, the task is to find the most likely configuration
of ˆY for unlabeled users based on the learned parameters ˆθ,
ˆY = arg max
Y |Y L p ˆθ (Y |X,Y L)
(14)
We also use the sampling method to obtain the predictions. In
principle, we can keep sampling with the estimated ˆθ and return
the configuration ˆY with the maximum likelihood. But in practice,
we simply choose the value with the highest probability in each
sampling step. It only guarantees finding a local optimum, but is
usually effective enough and much faster. (Cf. § 3 for details.)
3
EXPERIMENTS
We evaluate the proposed model on two different social media data:
Twitter and Weibo.
3.1
Experimental Setup
Datasets. We construct three datasets for experiments. Table 4
shows the basic statistics of the datasets.
• Twitter (World): We collect geo-tagged tweets posted in
2011 through Twitter API. There are 243,000,000 tweets
posted by 3,960,000 users in our collected data. After data pre-
processing, we obtain a dataset consisting of 1.5 million users
Table 4: Statistics of the datasets.
Dataset
#user
#edge
#location
Twitter (World)
1,480,360
25,867,610
159 (a)
Twitter (USA)
329,457
3,194,305
51 (b)
Weibo
1,073,923
26,849,122
34 (c)
⋆(a) 159 countries; (b) 50 states and Washington, D.C.; (c) 34 provinces.
from 159 countries in the world. The task on this dataset is to
infer the user’s country. Due to the limitations of the Twitter
API, we cannot crawl the following relationships; thus we

• Twitter (USA): This dataset is constructed from the same
raw data as that of Twitter (World). The difference is that
we only keep the USA users here. The task on this dataset is
to infer the user’s state.
• Weibo [43]: Weibo is the most popular Chinese microblog.
The original dataset consists of about 1,700,000 users, with
up to 1,000 of the most recent microblogs posted by each user.
The task is to infer the user’s province. We use reciprocal
following relationships as edges in this dataset.
We preprocess the three datasets in the following ways. First,
we filter out users who have fewer than 10 tweets in the dataset.
Then, we tokenize the tweet content into words. In Twitter, we split
the sentences by punctuation and spaces. For languages that do
not use spaces to separate words (such as Chinese and Japanese),
we split each character. In the Weibo data provided by [43], the
content has already been tokenized into Chinese words. For each
user, we combine all her/his tweets and derive content features as
defined in Eq. 8. The ground truth location is defined by different
ways in each dataset. In the two Twitter datasets, we convert the
GPS-tag on tweets to its country/state, and only keep the users
who posted all tweets in the same country/state in order to reduce
the noise in the training data. (In our data, more than 90% users
posted all their tweets in the same country in a year, and more
than 80% USA users posted all their tweets in the same state.) In
Weibo, the ground truth locations are extracted from user profiles,
which have been categorized into provinces. We collect the latitude
and longitude coordinates of the locations (for calculating the error
distances) through the Google Maps Geocoding API. In all datasets,
we remove the countries/states/provinces with fewer than 10 users.
Comparison methods. We compare the following methods for
location inference:
• Content [8]: It utilizes a simple probabilistic model to pre-
dict locations with tweet content only.
• Logistic Regression (LR): A baseline classification model
to predict the user location using logistic regression. We use
the same feature set as our proposed model, including both
content and profile features, but ignoring the correlations.
• Support Vector Machine (SVM) [44]: Zubiaga et al. have
applied SVM to classify tweet location. We choose a linear
function as the kernel of SVM.
6

Table 5: Performance comparison of different methods in user geo-location inference. (“Acc.” means Accuracy (%), and “MED”
means Mean Error Distance (km).)
Twitter (World)
Twitter (USA)
Weibo
Method
Acc.

MED
Acc.

MED
Acc.

MED
Content [8]
79.68
91.01
1278.89
40.61
51.60
931.32
30.96
52.88
555.68
Logistic Regression
94.44
98.18
302.06
48.22
67.37
707.34
36.98
58.12
499.67
SVM [44]
94.46
98.12
300.42
47.89
67.44
713.44
35.85
57.41
507.65
FindMe [5]
83.46
86.99
1350.08
46.34
57.60
1314.85
63.92
81.00
281.14
GCN [24]
94.54
97.98
288.20
58.36
74.56
516.51
66.18
79.14
257.95
SSFGM (SR)
95.18
98.29
280.87
56.12
73.15
606.28
64.32
80.27
281.61
SSFGM (SampleRank [37])
94.96
98.25
292.15
58.48
74.54
578.95
66.91
82.81
263.29
SSFGM (TCS)
95.68
98.32
229.77
62.51
76.37
489.75
70.34
80.44
232.59
SSFGM (TCS+Deep)
95.72
98.31
231.23
62.63
76.55
487.92
70.06
82.89
231.39
• FindMe [5]: This method infers user locations with social
and spatial proximity. It uses the network only and propa-
gates label information to unlabeled users.
• Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) [24]: We also con-
sider GCN, a state-of-the-art neural network model for graph-
based semi-supervised learning. It uses the same features
and correlations as our model to predict user locations.
• SSFGM: The proposed method. We compare the perfor-
mance of our model trained by three different algorithms:
Softmax Regression (SR), SampleRank [37], and Two-Chain
Sampling (TCS). We also report results when we enhance
the model with deep factors: SSFGM (TCS+Deep).
Evaluation metrics. For evaluation, we divide each dataset into
three parts: 50% for training, 10% for validation, and 40% for testing.
For the methods that do not require validation, the validation data
is also used for training. We consider three evaluation metrics:
Accuracy (percentage of the users whose locations are predicted

the top 3 predictions4), and Mean Error Distance (the average error
distance between the prediction and the true location).
Implementation details. For the Content method, we identify
location indicative words using the Information Gain Ratio criterion
proposed by [14]. For LR and SVM, we use the implementation of
Liblinear [11] with the default parameter setting. For GCN, we use
a two-layer GCN model with the hidden layer size of 128, and use
the mini-batched training approach [7].
For the proposed method, we implement SSFGM (TCS) and
SSFGM (TCS+deep) using TensorFlow [1] with the Adam opti-
mizer [23]. We empirically set up the hyperparameters according
to the performance on the validation set. Specifically, we use a
learning rate of η = 0.01, a mini-batch size of 512, and an early
stopping threshold of ε = 10. The deep factor is defined as a two-
layer fully-connected neural network, where the first layer has 128
hidden units and the second layer has 64 hidden units.
4All of the comparison methods can output a likelihood score for each location. We
rank the locations according to the likelihood and evaluate the top 3.
All experiments are performed on an x86-64 machine with 40-
core 3.00GHz Intel Xeon(R) CPUs, 3 NVIDIA Titan X GPUs, and
128GB RAM.
3.2
Experiment Results
Location inference performance. We compare the performance
of all the methods on the three datasets. Table 5 lists the perfor-
mance of comparison methods for geo-location inference.
In our experiments, the proposed SSFGM consistently outper-
forms all the comparison methods in terms of prediction accuracy
on all datasets. In Twitter (World), LR and SVM can achieve an accu-
racy of 94.4% in predicting the user’s country. Our SSFGM further
improves the accuracy to 95.7% by incorporating social network.
In Twitter (USA) and Weibo, it becomes harder to predict a user’s
state/province. This is because for predicting user’s country, the
content information might already be very indicative, as users from
different countries use different languages; while for predicting the
state-level location, we need to exploit more information such as
the social network. SSFGM achieves a significant improvement in
comparison with other methods that only utilize local attributes or
only utilize the network. It is noticeable that while using the same
content and network information, SSFGM significantly outperforms
Graph Convolutional Network (GCN), a state-of-the-art method has
been successfully applied in many other tasks on graphs. SSFGM
directly models the correlation between the locations of related
users, while GCN only models the correlation between the features.
In fact, we have also tried to combine GCN and SSFGM by defining
the attribute factor function using GCN (i.e., it takes the feature ma-
trix X as input instead of a single user’s feature xi alone). However,
it still cannot outperform SSFGM.
Another interesting discovery is that, in Twitter (USA), purely
network-based methods (e.g., FindMe) perform worse than linear
models (LR and SVM), but in Weibo (a Chinese microblog), they
significantly outperform linear models. This suggests that network
information is more important in the Weibo dataset. We suspect the
reason might be the differences of user behaviours and population
distributions between the USA and China.
7

Table 6: Performance and training time of different learning
algorithms for SSFGM on a small dataset [28]. (The numbers
in brackets represent the speedup against LBP.)
Method
Accuracy
Time
LBP [34]
91.52%
16.8 min
SR
90.94%
1.90 sec (530×)
SampleRank [37]
91.23%
5.26 sec (192×)
TCS
91.23%
8.57 sec (118×)
Table 7: Training time of GCN and SSFGM.
Method
Twitter (World) Twitter (USA)
Weibo
GCN
11 hr 11 min
48.3 min 4 hr 18 min
SSFGM (TCS)
1 hr 55 min
24.2 min
47.6 min
SSFGM (TCS+Deep)
1 hr 57 min
24.3 min
1 hr 4 min
Finally, we can observe that in general the deep factor helps
to improve inference accuracy of our model. Our motivation to
incorporate deep factor in our model is trying to capture the non-
linear, high-dimensional association between input features and
output locations. Although its benefit is not very significant in
our experiments, we have shown the feasibility of using neural
networks in our model. Designing more advanced and effective
neural network architectures will be an interesting future direction.
Comparison of different learning algorithms. Now we com-
pare the performance of four different learning algorithms for SS-
FGM, including the traditional Loopy Belief Propagation (LBP)
algorithm [34]. LBP suffers from its high computational cost, and
is not useful in our million-scale datasets. However, in order to
fairly compare it with the other algorithms, we construct a smaller
dataset with the Facebook ego-network data from SNAP [28]. In
this dataset, each user has an anonymized hometown location, but
content information is not available. We use Facebook friendships
as edges. After data preprocessing, we get a relatively small dataset
with 856 users and 11,789 edges. Then we compare the performance
of four learning algorithms on this dataset. Table 6 shows the results,
where the algorithms are mainly implemented in C++ and each one
uses a single CPU core. Among the algorithms, LBP achieves the
highest accuracy, but takes much more time to train than the others.
The other three algorithms have significantly reduced the training
time, either with approximation assumptions or sampling methods.
SR seems to be the most time-efficient, but its accuracy is worse than
that of the others. SampleRank and the proposed TCS algorithm
solve the computation cost problem (over 100× speedup compared
with LBP), and achieve comparable accuracy. From Table 5, we can
also see that TCS usually performs better than SampleRank on large
datasets.
We report the training time of TCS on the three large datasets
and compare them with GCN in Table 7. Here the algorithms are
running on three GPUs under the Tensorflow framework. With
TCS, our model takes only 0.4–2 hours of training on million-scale
datasets and achieves the best prediction performance among the
comparison methods. It is also much faster than GCN.
Twitter (World)
Twitter (USA)
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Accuracy
SSFGM
SSFGM-profile
SSFGM-content
SSFGM-network
Figure 2: Feature contribution analysis.
(SSFGM-profile,
-content, -network means removing profile features, content
features, or correlation factors, respectively.)
Factor contribution analysis. We evaluate how different factors
(content, profile, and network) contribute to location inference
in the proposed model. We use the two Twitter datasets in this
study. Specifically, we remove each factor from our SSFGM and
then evaluate the model’s prediction accuracy decrease. The larger
the decrease, the more important the factor to the model. Figure 2
shows the results on the Twitter datasets. We see that different
factors contribute differently on the two datasets. The content-
based features seem to be the most useful in the proposed model
for inferring location on the Twitter datasets. On the other hand,
all features are helpful. This analysis confirms the necessity of
incorporating various features in the proposed model.
Training data ratio analysis. We conduct further experiments to
evaluate our method’s performance when training data is limited.
We change the training data ratio in each dataset and compare
several methods’ prediction accuracies. The validation and testing
sets remain constant. The results are shown in Figure 3. SSFGM
does quite well, even with only 10% of labeled data. Its prediction
accuracy steadily increases when more labeled data are used for
training. It shows distinct advantages compared with LR, whose
performance can hardly be improved by adding more training data.
4
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we studied the problem of inferring user locations
from social media. We proposed a general probabilistic model based
on factor graphs. The model generalizes previous methods by incor-
porating content, network, and deep features learned from social
context. It is also sufficiently flexible to support semi-supervised
learning with limited labeled data. We proposed a Two-Chain Sam-
pling (TCS) algorithm, which significantly improves the inference
accuracy. This algorithm is also parallelizable and is capable of
handling large-scale networked data. Our experiments on three
different datasets validated the effectiveness and the efficiency of
the model.
