Spatio-Temporal Tuples Transformer for
Skeleton-Based Action Recognition
Helei Qiu, Biao Hou*, Bo Ren, Xiaohua Zhang
Xidian University
Abstract: Capturing the dependencies between joints is critical in skeleton-
based action recognition task. Transformer shows great potential to model the
correlation of important joints. However, the existing Transformer-based meth-
ods cannot capture the correlation of different joints between frames, which the
correlation is very useful since different body parts (such as the arms and legs
in ”long jump”) between adjacent frames move together. Focus on this prob-
lem, A novel spatio-temporal tuples Transformer (STTFormer) method is pro-
posed. The skeleton sequence is divided into several parts, and several consecu-
tive frames contained in each part are encoded. And then a spatio-temporal tuples
self-attention module is proposed to capture the relationship of different joints in
consecutive frames. In addition, a feature aggregation module is introduced be-
tween non-adjacent frames to enhance the ability to distinguish similar actions.
Compared with the state-of-the-art methods, our method achieves better perfor-
mance on two large-scale datasets.
1
Introduction
Recently, skeleton-based action recognition has attracted substantial attention since its
compact skeleton data representation makes the models more efﬁcient and robust to
complex background, illumination conditions, viewpoint changes and other environ-
mental noise. In addition, the development of cost-effective depth cameras and human
pose estimation methods makes it easier to obtain human skeleton information.
The raw skeleton data is usually converted into point sequences, pseudo images
or graph, and then input into deep network (such as recurrent neural network (RNN),
convolutional neural network (CNN) or graph neural network (GCN)) for feature ex-
traction. However, the RNN-based methods [36,30,29] processes sequences recursively,
and the CNN-based methods [19,12,42,11] performs local operations on a ﬁxed size
window. Both methods capture only short-range correlations. The GCN-based methods
[38,26,20,22,15,7,8] rely on the inherent graph topology of the human body, and can-
not effectively use the correlation between unconnected joints (such as hands and feet in
“put on shoes”). In general, the above methods cannot effectively model the long-term
dependence of sequences and the global correlation of spatio-temporal joints.
The Transformer-based methods does not depend on the human structure, and can
model the relationship between all joints compared with the above-mentioned methods.
Considering this advantage, Transformer [32] is applied to skeleton-based action recog-
nition tasks [35,23,28]. How to use Transformer to model spatio-temporal correlation
is crucial since the spatiotemporal joints of skeleton data are correlated. [35] regards
arXiv:2201.02849v1  [cs.CV]  8 Jan 2022

2
t-1              t                t+1
(a)
t-1              t                t+1
(b)
Fig. 1. Two spatio-temporal self-attention schemes. (a): This scheme only establishes the relation-
ship of intra-frame joints and the same joints between inter-frames. (b): This scheme captures the
relationship of all joints in several consecutive frames at the same time.
spatio-temporal skeleton data as a single sequence to capture the related information of
all joints. However, this strategy is unreasonable since the spatial and temporal joints
have different semantic information. Speciﬁcally, the relationship between spatial joints
reﬂects the interaction between various parts of the human body, and the same joints
between temporal frames represent the motion trajectory of a certain part of the hu-
man body. In addition, this method needs to calculate the self-attention of all joints in
the sequence at the same time, which will signiﬁcantly increase the computational cost.
Focus on these problems, [23] introduces self-attention into graph convolution, and uses
a spatial and temporal self-attention module to model the correlation of intra-frame and
inter-frame joints respectively. Similarly, [28] uses pure self-attention to capture the
relationship of the spatio-temporal joints. However, these methods only focus on the
same joints between frames (Fig. 1(a)), and the extracted related motion features are
too simple. It is observed that different joints in several consecutive frames are related.
For example, in the action ”long jump”, the arms of the previous frame are related to
the legs of the next frame since the joints of these parts move together in cases of action
movement. Therefore, it is very useful to extract the related features of different joints
between adjacent frames.
Based on the above observations, we construct a novel spatio-temporal tuples Trans-
former (STTFormer) model for skeleton-based action recognition. Speciﬁcally, a skele-
ton sequence is divided into several non-overlapping parts. Each part is called a ”tuple”
and contains several consecutive frames. Because different joints in several consecu-
tive frames have correlation, each tuple is ﬂattened into a short sequence, and then a
spatio-temporal tuple self-attention (STTA) module is used to extract the related fea-
tures of joints in each short sequence simply and effectively as shown in Fig. 1(b).
This method not only capture the correlation of different joints between consecutive
frames, but also hardly increase the computational cost. Because although all joints
of several frames need to be modeled at the same time, the size of time dimension
is greatly reduced. In addition, we aggregate features on the time dimension com-
posed of several tuples. If a tuple is regarded as a sub-action, the inter-frame feature
aggregation (IFFA) can be regarded as the integration of a series of sub-actions. the

3
IFFA module will help distinguish similar actions. Finally, multi-mode data is also
used to further improve performance. The code will be made publicly available at
https://github.com/heleiqiu/STTFormer
The main contributions of this work are as follows:
– A spatio-temporal tuple encoding strategy is proposed to explicitly ﬂatten the joints
of several consecutive frames, so that our model can capture the related information
of different joints between frames.
– A spatio-temporal tuple Transformer is proposed, in which the spatio-temporal tu-
ple attention is used to capture the related features of the joints in each tuple, and
the inter-frame feature aggregation module is used to integrate all tuples.
– We conducted extensive experiments on two challenging benchmarks. Ablation ex-
periments verify the effectiveness of each component of our model, and the perfor-
mance of our method exceeds the existing state-of-the-art methods.
2
Related Work
2.1
Self-Attention Mechanism
Recently, Transformer [32] has become the leading language model in natural language
processing. The self-attention is an important component of Transformer, which can
learn the relationships between each element of a sequence. Transformer can handle
very long sequences and solves the problem that LSTM and RNN networks cannot ef-
fectively model long-term sequences. In addition, the multi-headed self-attention mech-
anism can process sentences in parallel, rather than processing sentences word by word
recursively like LSTM and RNN networks.
Due to the advantages of self-attention, which has also been introduced into com-
puter vision tasks such as image classiﬁcation and recognition [37,6], object detection
[3,41] and action recognition [2,23,1]. [37] combined CNN and self-attention to model
the local and global dependencies for image classiﬁcation. [2] used self-attention to
learn spatio-temporal features from a sequence of frame-level patches for video action
recognition. Based on GCN, [23] used self-attention instead of regular graph convolu-
tion in space and time for skeleton-based action recognition. In contrast to [23], we use
pure self-attention to model skeleton data, and the correlation of all joints in several
consecutive frames is calculated at the same time.
2.2
Skeleton-Based Action Recognition
Skeleton-based action recognition has been widely studied for decades. Previously,
skeleton-based motion modeling methods mainly used 3D information of joints to
design handcrafted features [33,9]. With the breakthrough of high-performance com-
puting and deep learning technology, deep learning shows excellent ability to extract
features. At present, the deep learning methods for skeleton-based action recognition
are mainly divided into three categories: (1) The RNN-based methods [36,30,29,31]
is based on the natural time properties of the skeleton sequence, and then modeled by
Long Short Term Memory (LSTM), Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU), etc.; (2) The CNN-
based methods [19,12,42,17] usually convert the skeleton sequence into the pseudo-
images using speciﬁc transformation rules, and model it with efﬁcient image classiﬁca-
tion networks. The CNN-based methods usually combined with RNN-based methods to

4
model the temporal information of skeleton sequence. (3) The GCN-based [38,26,20]
methods utilize the natural topology and regular sequence of skeleton data in space and
time to encode the skeleton into spatio-temporal graph, and use graph convolution net-
work to model it. Unlike the above-mentioned methods that represent skeleton data as
images or graph, we directly use self-attention to model the skeletal data.
2.3
Context Aware-based Methods
The context aware-based methods [26,40,21,14,20] are designed to extract the features
of spatio-temporal non-local joints since they are also related (such as clapping and typ-
ing request the cooperation of both hands). [26] superimposes an adaptive matrix on the
ﬁxed adjacency matrix to learn the non-local relationship between joints. This method
alleviates the limitation caused by the ﬁxed graph topology of the existing GCN-based
methods. However, the method only connects the same joints between frames, and can-
not model the relationship of different joints between frames. [40] proposed a context
aware graph convolution model, which uses three different functions of inner product,
bi-linear form and trainable relevance score to calculate the correlation between joints,
and then embeds it into the graph convolution to enrich the local response of each body
joint by using the information of all other joints. [21] focuses on adding connections
on adjacent vertices between frames, and extracting additional features based on the
extended temporal graph. Similarly, [20] proposed a multi-scale aggregation scheme to
separate the importance of nodes in different neighborhoods in order to achieve effec-
tive remote modeling. In addition, a uniﬁed spatio-temporal graph convolution operator
is proposed, which takes the dense cross spatio-temporal edges as skip connections
to directly propagate information on the spatio-temporal graph. However, the above
method can be regarded as an extension of graph topology and cannot ensure that
important joints are connected. In this work, self-attention is utilized to model cross
spatio-temporal joints and adaptively capture important joints related to human actions.
3
Method
In this section, the overall architecture of the proposed method ﬁrst is summarized.
In the follow, the spatio-temporal tuples encoding and positional encoding strategy is
introduced. Finally, each component of the spatio-temporal tuples Transformer is de-
scribed in detail.
3.1
Overall Architecture
The overall architecture of our model is shown in Fig. 2. The input is a skeleton se-
quence with V0 joints and T0 frames. We divided the sequence into T parts, each one
containing n consecutive frames, a total of V = n ∗V0 joints. Then a tuple encoding
layer is utilized to encode each tuple data. A total of L layers are stacked in spatio-
temporal tuples Transformer, and each layer is composed of STTA and IFFA, in which
STTA module is used to model the relationship between joints in tuples and IFFA is
used to integrate all tuples. Finally, the obtained features are input into a global average
pooling layer and a full connection layer to obtain classiﬁcation scores. In the following
sections, the details of each module will be introduced.

5
1  · · ·      T
· · ·
1· · ·n   i-n· · · i      T-n· · · T
···
···
···
Positional
Encoding
{
T
· · ·
· · ·
Tuples
Encoding
STTA
´L
GAP
+
FC
Prediction
{
V
STTFormer
IFFA
Sequence
Division
Layer
Fig. 2. Illustration of the overall architecture of the proposed model. which consists of two main
modules: the spatio-temporal tuples encoding and spatio-temporal tuples Transformer.
3.2
Spatio-Temporal Tuples Encoding
To model the relationship between different joints in several consecutive frames, we
propose a strategy to encode these joints. The spatio-temporal tuples encoding proce-
dure is illustrated in Fig. 3.
0
0
0
C
T
V
´
´
Input Map
Sequence Division
Reshape
Spatio-Temporal
Tuples Encoding
1
0
0
C
T
V
´
´
1
0
C
T
n V
´
´ ´
1
C
T
V
´
´
C T
V
´
´
X
0
X
Fig. 3. Illustration of the proposed spatio-temporal tuples encoding module.
Firstly, the raw skeleton sequence X0 ∈RC0×T0×V0 is fed to a feature mapping
layer to expand the input channel to a set number C1. The feature mapping layer is
implemented by one convolution layers with BatchNorm and Leaky ReLU function.
Subsequently, the skeleton sequence is divided into T non-overlapping tuples:
X = [x1, x2, · · · , xT ], xi ∈RC1×n×V0
(1)
where n denotes the number of frames contained in a tuple. In the follow, each tuple is
ﬂattened:
X ∈RC1×T ×n×V0 →RC1×T ×V
(2)
where T = T0/n, V = n × V0. Finally, X is fed to a spatio-temporal tuples encoding
layer implemented by one convolution layer with Leaky ReLU function to get the ﬁnal
tuples encoding X ∈RC×T ×V .

6
3.3
Positional Encoding
The tensor obtained by tuples encoding does not contain the order of joints, and the
identity of joints cannot be distinguished, which will reduce the performance of ac-
tion recognition [28,34], which is also conﬁrmed by the experimental results in Tab 1.
Considering this problem, a position encoding module is used to mark each joint, and
the sine and cosine functions with different frequencies are utilized as the encoding
functions:
PE(p, 2i) = sin(p/100002i/Cin)
PE(p, 2i + 1) = cos(p/100002i/Cin)
(3)
where p and i denote the position of joint and the dimension of the position encoding
vector, respectively. To model the relationship of all joints in a tuple, it is necessary to
distinguish the joints of different consecutive frames, so all joints in a tuple are assigned
different IDs.
3.4
Spatio-Temporal Tuples Transformer
As shown in Fig. 4, the spatio-temporal tuple Transformer layer includes two main
components: spatio-temporal tuple attention and inter-frame feature aggregation, which
will be described in detail below.
Spatio-Temporal Tuples Attention The essence of self-attention can be described as
the mapping from a query to a series of key and value pairs. After spatio-temporal tuples
encoding and positional encoding of skeleton sequence, the multi-headed self-attention
mechanism can be used to model the relationship between input tokens.
Speciﬁcally, when calculating self-attention, not only the impact of all other nodes
on the node ni, but also the impact of the node ni on other nodes must be considered.
Therefore, the encoded sequence Xin is usually projected into the query Q, key K and
value V. In this work, a convolution layer with 1 × 1 kernel size is used to project the
encoded sequence Xin:
Q, K, V = Conv2D(1×1)(Xin)
(4)
Then, the weights can be obtained by calculating the similarity between the query Q
and the transpose of the key K. Like the standard Transformer, the dot-product is simply
used as the similarity function. Subsequently, the Tanh function is utilized to normalize
the obtained weights. And then the weights and corresponding value V are weighted
and summed to obtain ﬁnal attention.
Xattn = Tanh
QKT
√
C

V
(5)
where C denotes the number of channels of the key K, which can avoid excessive inner
product to increase gradients stability during training. Considering the ﬁxed relationship
of human joints, learn from DSTANet [28], a spatial global regularization is utilized to
introduce this relationship.

7
To obtain better performance, the multi-headed self-attention mechanism is usually
applied, which allows the model to learn related information in different representation
subspaces. Speciﬁcally, the self-attention operation is performed on multiple groups of
Q, K, V projected by different learnable parameters, and then the multiple groups of
attention were concatenated.
XAttn = Concat(X1
attn, · · · , Xh
attn)
(6)
In the follow, the obtained XAttn is projected into an output space by a convolution
operation with 1 × k1 kernel size to obtain the result of multi-headed self-attention.
XST T A = Conv2D(1×k1)(XAttn)
(7)
where k1 corresponding to the ﬂattened dimension of spatio-temporal tuples.
Similar to the transformer, a feed forward layer implemented by 1x1 2D convolution
is added to fuse the output.
Projection to Attention
Q
K
V
K
V
K
V
K
Q
K
Q
V
K
Q
Multi-headed Self-Attention
Projection out Attention
in
X
out
X
Feed Forword
Inter-Frame Feature Aggregation
Fig. 4. Illustration of the proposed spatio-temporal tuples Transformer layer, the complete
STTFormer is stacked by L such layers.
Inter-Frame Feature Aggregation An action can be regarded as composed of sev-
eral different sub-actions, such as ”long jump” including sub-actions such as ”run-up”,
”take-off” and ”landing”. In our method, each tuple contains a sub-action, which is ob-
tained by modeling several consecutive n frames using STTA. If the correlation of these
sub-actions (such as ”run-up”, ”take-off” and ”landing”) is constructed, it will help to
action recognition and distinguish similar actions (such as high jump and long jump).

8
Therefore, the IFFA operation is proposed to aggregate these sub-actions. A convolu-
tion operation with k2 × 1 kernel size is used to realize inter-frame feature aggregation
in temporal dimension.
XIF F A = Conv2D(k2×1)(XST T A)
(8)
Finally, the residual connections in Fig. 4 are also used to stabilize network training.
It should be noted that all outputs connected to the rest should be regularized.
4
Experiments
In this section, we conducted extensive comparative experiments to evaluate the perfor-
mance of our method. Firstly, the datasets are described. Then the experimental setup
is introduced. In the follow, we conducted extensive ablation studies on NTU RGB+D
[24] skeleton sequence data to evaluate the contribution of each parts of our method.
Finally, the proposed method is compared with the state-of-the-art methods on NTU
RGB+D and NTU RGB+D 120 [18] skeleton sequence data to prove the advantages of
our method, and the corresponding analysis is given.
4.1
Datasets
NTU RGB+D. NTU RGB+D dataset is a large-scale benchmark for 3D human ac-
tion recognition captured simultaneously using three Microsoft Kinect V2 sensors. The
dataset was completed by 40 volunteers and contained 56,000 action sequences in 60
action classes, including 40 daily actions, 9 health-related actions and 11 mutual ac-
tions. This experiment only uses the skeleton data containing the three-dimensional
positions of 25 body joints per frame. The dataset is divided into training set and test
set by two different standards. The Cross-Subject (X-Sub) divides the dataset accord-
ing to the person ID. the training set and the test set contains 20 subsets respectively.
The Cross-View (X-View) divides the dataset according to camera ID. The samples col-
lected by cameras 2 and 3 are used for training, and the samples collected by camera 1
are used for testing. It should be noted that the horizontal angles of the three cameras
differ by 45° respectively.
NTU RGB+D 120. NTU RGB+D 120 dataset extends NTU RGB+D by adding another
60 classes and another 57,600 samples. The dataset was completed by 106 volunteers
and has 114,480 samples and 120 classes in total, including 82 daily actions, 12 health-
related actions and 26 mutual actions. Like NTU RGB+D, the dataset is also divided
by two different standards. For Cross-Subject (X-Sub), the 106 subjects are split into
training and testing groups. Each group consists of 53 subjects. For Cross setup (X-Set)
takes samples with even collection setup IDs as the training set and samples with odd
setup IDs as the test set.
4.2
Experimental Setting
All experiments were performed on 2 GTX 3090 GPUs. All skeleton sequences are
padded to 120 frames by replaying the actions. Our model is trained using a Stochas-
tic Gradient Descent (SGD) optimizer with Nesterov momentum 0.9 and weight decay

9
0.0005, using cross entropy as the loss function. The training epoch is set to 90, the
initial learning rate is 0.1, and it is adjusted to one-tenth at 60 and 80 epochs respec-
tively. The batch size is 64. Each tuple contains 6 consecutive frames, that is, n = 6.
The number of spatio-temporal self-attention layers is set to 8, and the output channels
are 64, 64, 128, 128, 256, 256, 256, and 256, respectively.
4.3
Ablation Studies
In this section, the effectiveness of the proposed method is investigated on NTU RGB+D
Skeleton dataset. For fair comparison, other settings are the same except for the ex-
plored object.
Ablation Studies for Position Encoding and IFFA The effect of the position en-
coding and the IFFA module are investigated. As shown in Tab. 1, the accuracy of
the STTFormer model without position encoding is lower lower than that of complete
model, it shows that position encoding can signiﬁcantly improve performance. The
main reason is that different spatio-temporal joints play different roles in an action,
and reasonable use of this sequence information will effectively improve performance.
Table 1. Ablation studies for position encoding and IFFA on the NTU RGB+D Skeleton dataset
in joint mode. PE denotes position encoding.
Method
X-Sub (%) X-View (%)
STTFormer without PE
89.3
91.8
STTFormer without IFFA
84.5
88.1
STTFormer
89.9
94.3
Tab. 1 also shows the effect of the IFFA module. It can be found that removing
the IFFA module will seriously reduce the performance. The main reason is that the
module can effectively model the relationship between sub-actions, which is conducive
to distinguish similar actions, thereby improving the performance of the model.
Ablation Studies for STTA In order to verify the effectiveness of our STTA module,
a set of comparative experiments are constructed. The number of consecutive frames
n contained in each tuple is set to 1 and 6, respectively. n = 1 means that only the
relationship between intra-frame joints is modeled, The scheme is similar to Fig. 1(a);
When n = 6, it means that the relationship between different joints in 6 consecutive
frames is modeled at the same time. To ensure the fairness of the experiment, the kernel
size k1, k2 are set to 1 to eliminate the inﬂuence of different convolution kernel sizes.
The experimental results are shown in Tab. 2. It is obvious that the proposed STTA
can signiﬁcantly improve the performance of the model. The main beneﬁt is that the
proposed STTA module can not only model the relationship between joints in a frame,
but also capture the relationship between different joints in several consecutive frames,
so as to improve the performance.

10
Table 2. Effect of spatio-temporal tuple attention evaluated on NTU RGB+D Skeleton dataset in
joint mode.
Method
X-Sub (%) X-View (%)
STTFormer (n = 1; k1, k2 = 1)
82.9
86.0
STTFormer (n = 6; k1, k2 = 1)
86.2
91.3
Effect of Parameters n The effects of the number of consecutive frames n on our
model is explored, as shown in Fig. 5. It can be found that the accuracy of our model
Fig. 5. Effect of the different length n of consecutive frames evaluated on NTU RGB+D Skeleton
dataset in joint mode.
is the best when n = 6, which is consistent with the fact. Because if n is too small,
it cannot effectively extract features from the joints of insufﬁcient consecutive frames;
And if n is too large, the joint relationship between several consecutive frames is too
complex, and the correlation between the ﬁrst and last frames of each part is low.
Effect of Multi-Modes Data Different patterns of data have different characteris-
tics. Fusing multi-modes data can signiﬁcantly improve performance. Like most SOTA
methods, our model is trained using joint, bone and joint motion modes data respec-
tively, and then average the reasoning outputs of our models to get the ﬁnal results. The
experimental results in Tab. 3 verify our viewpoint.
4.4
Comparison with the State-of-the-Art Methods
The proposed STTFormer method is compared with the state-of-the-art methods on two
different datasets: NTU RGB+D, NTU RGB+D 120 Skeleton. Tab. 4 shows the com-

11
Table 3. Ablation studies for the multi-mode data on the NTU RGB+D Skeleton dataset.
Method
X-Sub (%) X-View (%)
STTFormer (joint)
89.9
94.3
STTFormer (bone)
88.8
93.3
STTFormer (joint motion)
87.0
93.6
Fusion
92.3
96.5
parison of recognition accuracy. The comparison methods include CNN-based, RNN-
based, GCN-based and Transformer-based methods.
Table 4. Recognition accuracy comparison against state-of-the-art methods on NTU RGB+D and
NTU RGB+D 120 Skeleton dataset.
Methods
NTU RGB+D
NTU RGB+D 120
X-Sub (%) X-View (%) X-Sub (%) X-Set (%)
MTCNN[10]
81.1
87.4
61.2
63.3
IndRNN[16]
81.8
88.0
-
-
HCN[13]
86.5
91.1
-
-
ST-GCN[38]
81.5
88.3
-
-
2s-AGCN[27]
88.5
95.1
82.9
84.9
DGNN[25]
89.9
96.1
-
-
Shift-GCN[5]
90.7
96.5
85.9
87.6
Dynamic-GCN[39]
91.5
96.0
85.9
87.6
MS-G3D[20]
91.5
96.2
86.9
88.4
MST-GCN[4]
91.5
96.6
87.5
88.8
ST-TR[23]
89.9
96.1
82.7
84.7
DSTA-Net[28]
91.5
96.4
86.6
89.0
STTFormer(Ours)
92.3
96.5
88.3
89.2
Compared with the CNN and RNN-based methods [10,16,13], our proposed STTFormer
has signiﬁcant advantages. The main reason for the poor performance of the CNN and
RNN-based methods is that they cannot fully utilize the information of skeleton data.
In contrast, the GCN based methods can effectively use the topology of skeleton data
and and has better recognition performance.
Compared with the GCN-based methods [38,27,25,5,39,20,4], our method has cer-
tain advantages. The reason is that some actions depend on non-local joint interaction,
and the STTFormer can fully utilize the interaction information.
Compared with the Transformer-based methods [23,28], our method also achieves
state-of-the-art performance. The main beneﬁt is that the STTFormer makes effective
use of the correlation of non-local joints between frames.

12
5
Conclusion
In this work, we propose a novel spatio-temporal tuples Transformer (STTFormer)
method for skeleton-based action recognition. Our method consists of two modules:
STTA and IFFA. The STTA module is used to effectively capture the relationship be-
tween different joints in continuous frames, and the IFFA module is used to aggre-
gate the characteristics of several sub-action segments. Ablation studies show the effec-
tiveness of the proposed method. On two large-scale datasets NTU RGB+D and NTU
RGB+D 120 Skeleton, the proposed STTFormer achieves better performance with the
existing state-of-the-art methods.
