Ontology-based Data Access:
A Study through Disjunctive Datalog, CSP, and MMSNP
Meghyn Bienvenu
CNRS & Université Paris Sud
Orsay, France
Balder ten Cate
UC Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA, USA
Carsten Lutz
University of Bremen
Bremen, Germany
Frank Wolter
University of Liverpool
Liverpool, UK
ABSTRACT
Ontology-based data access is concerned with querying incom-
plete data sources in the presence of domain-speciﬁc knowledge
provided by an ontology. A central notion in this setting is that
of an ontology-mediated query, which is a database query cou-
pled with an ontology. In this paper, we study several classes of
ontology-mediated queries, where the database queries are given
as some form of conjunctive query and the ontologies are formu-
lated in description logics or other relevant fragments of ﬁrst-order
logic, such as the guarded fragment and the unary-negation frag-
ment.
The contributions of the paper are three-fold.
First, we
characterize the expressive power of ontology-mediated queries in
terms of fragments of disjunctive datalog. Second, we establish
intimate connections between ontology-mediated queries and con-
straint satisfaction problems (CSPs) and their logical generaliza-
tion, MMSNP formulas. Third, we exploit these connections to ob-
tain new results regarding (i) ﬁrst-order rewritability and datalog-
rewritability of ontology-mediated queries, (ii) P/NP dichotomies
for ontology-mediated queries, and (iii) the query containment
problem for ontology-mediated queries.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.2.3 [Database Management]: Languages—Query languages;
H.2.5 [Database Management]: Heterogeneous Databases
Keywords
Ontology-Based Data Access; Query Answering; Query Rewriting
1.
INTRODUCTION
Ontologies are logical theories that formalize domain-speciﬁc
knowledge, thereby making it available for machine processing.
Recent years have seen an increasing interest in using ontologies in
data-intensive applications, especially in the context of intelligent
systems, the semantic web, and in data integration. A much studied
scenario is that of answering queries over an incomplete database
under the open world semantics, taking into account knowledge
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
PODS’13, June 22–27, 2013, New York, New York, USA.
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-2066-5/13/06 ...$15.00.
provided by an ontology [19, 18, 16]. We refer to this as ontology-
based data access (OBDA).
There are several important use cases for OBDA. A classical one
is to enrich an incomplete data source with background knowledge,
in order to obtain a more complete set of answers to a query. For ex-
ample, if a medical patient database contains the facts that patient1
has ﬁnding Erythema Migrans and patient2 has ﬁnding Lyme dis-
ease, and the ontology provides the background knowledge that a
ﬁnding of Erythema Migrans is sufﬁcient for diagnosing Lyme dis-
ease, then both patient1 and patient2 can be returned when query-
ing for patients that have the diagnosis Lyme disease. This use of
ontologies is also central to query answering in the semantic web.
OBDA can also be used to enrich the data schema (that is, the re-
lation symbols used in the presentation of the data) with additional
symbols to be used in a query. For example, a patient database
may contain facts such as patient1 has diagnosis Lyme disease and
patient2 has diagnosis Listeriosis, and an ontology could add the
knowledge that Lyme disease and Listeriosis are both bacterial in-
fections, thus enabling queries such as “return all patients with a
bacterial infection” despite the fact that the data schema does not
include a relation or attribute explicitly referring to bacterial infec-
tions. Especially in the bio-medical domain, applications of this
kind are fueled by the availability of comprehensive professional
ontologies such as SNOMED CT and FMA. A third prominent ap-
plication of OBDA is in data integration, where an ontology can
be used to provide a uniform view on multiple data sources [40].
This typically involves mappings from the source schemas to the
schema of the ontology, which we will not explicitly consider here.
We may view the actual database query and the ontology as two
components of one composite query, which we call an ontology-
mediated query.
OBDA can then be described as the problem
of answering ontology-mediated queries.
The database queries
used in OBDA are typically unions of conjunctive queries, while
the ontologies are typically speciﬁed in an ontology language that
is either a description logic, or, more generally, a suitable frag-
ment of ﬁrst-order logic.
For popular choices of ontology lan-
guages, the data complexity of ontology-mediated queries can be
CONP-complete, which has resulted in extensive research on ﬁnd-
ing tractable classes of ontology-mediated queries, as well as on
ﬁnding classes of ontology-mediated queries that are amenable to
efﬁcient query answering techniques [17, 29, 32]. In particular,
relevant classes of ontology-mediated queries have been identiﬁed
that admit an FO-rewriting (i.e., that are equivalent to a ﬁrst-order
query), or, alternatively, admit a datalog-rewriting. FO-rewritings
make it possible to answer ontology-based queries using traditional
database management systems. This is considered one of the most
promising approaches for OBDA, and is currently the subject of
signiﬁcant research activity, see for example [18, 28, 30, 31, 42].
arXiv:1301.6479v2  [cs.DB]  6 Jun 2013

The main aims of this paper are (i) to characterize the expressive
power of ontology-mediated queries, both in terms of more tradi-
tional database query languages and from a descriptive complexity
perspective and (ii) to make progress towards complete and decid-
able classiﬁcations of ontology-mediated queries, with respect to
their data complexity, as well as with respect to FO-rewritability
and datalog-rewritability.
We take an ontology-mediated query to be a triple (S, O, q)
where S is a data schema, O an ontology, and q a query. Here,
the data schema S ﬁxes the set of relation symbols than can occur
in the data and the ontology O is a logical theory that may use
the relation symbols from S as well as additional symbols. The
query q can use any relation symbol that occurs in S or O. As
ontology languages, we consider a range of standard description
logics (DLs) and several fragments of ﬁrst-order logic that embed
ontology languages such as Datalog± [15], namely the guarded
fragment (GF), the unary negation fragment (UNFO), and the
guarded negation fragment (GNFO). As query languages for q, we
focus on unions of conjunctive queries (UCQs) and unary atomic
queries (AQs). The latter are of the form A(x), with A a unary
relation symbol, and correspond to what are traditionally called
instance queries in the OBDA literature (note that A may be a
relation symbol from O that is not part of the data schema). These
two query languages are among the most used query languages
in OBDA. In the following, we use (L, Q) to denote the query
language that consists of all ontology-mediated queries (S, O, q)
with O speciﬁed in the ontology language L and q speciﬁed in the
query language Q. For example, (GF,UCQ) refers to ontology-
mediated queries in which O is a GF-ontology and q is a UCQ. We
refer to such query languages (L, Q) as ontology-mediated query
languages (or, OBDA languages).
In Section 3, we characterize the expressive power of OBDA lan-
guages in terms of natural fragments of (negation-free) disjunctive
datalog. We ﬁrst consider the basic description logic ALC. We
show that (ALC,UCQ) has the same expressive power as monadic
disjunctive datalog (abbreviated MDDlog) and that (ALC,AQ) has
the same expressive power as unary queries deﬁned in a syntac-
tic fragment of MDDlog that we call connected simple MDDlog.
Similar results hold for various description logics that extend ALC
with, for example, inverse roles, role hierarchies, and the univer-
sal role, all of which are standard operators included in the W3C-
standardized ontology language OWL2 DL. Turning to other frag-
ments of ﬁrst-order logic, we then show that (UNFO,UCQ) also
has the same expressive power as MDDlog, while (GF,UCQ) and
(GNFO,UCQ) are strictly more expressive and coincide in expres-
sive power with frontier-guarded disjunctive datalog, which is the
DDlog fragment given by programs in which, for every atom α in
the head of a rule, there is an atom β in the rule body that contains
all variables from α.
In Sections 4 and 5, we study ontology-mediated queries from
a descriptive complexity perspective. In particular, we establish an
intimate connection between OBDA query languages, constraint
satisfaction problems, and MMSNP. Recall that constraint satis-
faction problems (CSPs) form a subclass of the complexity class
NP that, although it contains NP-hard problems, is in certain ways
more computationally well-behaved.
The widely known Feder-
Vardi conjecture [24] states that there is a dichotomy between
PTIME and NP for the class of all CSPs, that is, each CSP is ei-
ther in PTIME or NP-hard. In other words, the conjecture asserts
that there are no CSPs which are NP-intermediate in the sense of
Ladner’s theorem. Monotone monadic strict NP without inequal-
ity (abbreviated MMSNP) was introduced by Feder and Vardi as
a logical generalization of CSP that enjoys similar computational
properties [24]. In particular, it was shown in [24, 33] that there is
a dichotomy between PTIME and NP for MMSNP sentences if and
only if the Feder-Vardi conjecture holds.
In Section 4, we observe that (ALC,UCQ) and many other
OBDA languages based on UCQs have the same expressive power
as the query language coMMSNP, consisting of all queries whose
complement is deﬁnable by an MMSNP formula with free vari-
ables. In the spirit of descriptive complexity theory, we say that
(ALC,UCQ) captures coMMSNP. In fact, this result is a conse-
quence of the results in Section 3 and the observation that MDDlog
has the same expressive power as coMMSNP. It has fundamental
consequences regarding the data complexity of ontology-mediated
queries and the containment problem for such queries, which we
describe next.
First, we obtain that there is a dichotomy between PTIME and
CONP for ontology-mediated queries from (ALC,UCQ) if and only
if the Feder-Vardi conjecture holds, and similarly for many other
OBDA languages based on UCQs. To appreciate this result, re-
call that considerable effort has been directed towards identifying
tractable classes of ontology-mediated queries. Ideally, one would
like to classify the data complexity of every ontology-mediated
query within a given OBDA language such as (ALC,UCQ). Our
aforementioned result ties this task to proving the Feder-Vardi con-
jecture. Signiﬁcant progress has been made in understanding the
complexity of CSPs and MMSNPs [14, 12, 34], and the connection
established in this paper facilitates the transfer of techniques and
results from CSP and MMSNP in order to analyze the data com-
plexity of query evaluation in (ALC,UCQ). We also consider the
standard extension ALCF of ALC with functional roles and note
that, for query evaluation in (ALCF,AQ), there is no dichotomy
between PTIME and CONP unless PTIME = NP.
To establish a counterpart of (GF,UCQ) and (GNFO,UCQ) in
the MMSNP world, we introduce guarded monotone strict NP (ab-
breviated GMSNP) as a generalization of MMSNP; speciﬁcally,
GMSNP is obtained from MMSNP by allowing guarded second-
order quantiﬁcation in the place of monadic second-order quan-
tiﬁcation, similarly as in the transition from MDDlog to frontier-
guarded disjunctive datalog. The resulting query language coGM-
SNP has the same expressive power as frontier-guarded disjunctive
datalog, and therefore, in particular, (GF,UCQ) and (GNFO,UCQ)
capture coGMSNP. We observe that GMSNP has the same expres-
sive power as the extension MMSNP2 of MMSNP proposed in
[37]. It follows from our results in Section 3 that GMSNP (and
thus MMSNP2) is strictly more expressive than MMSNP, clos-
ing an open problem from [37]. We leave it as an open problem
whether GMSNP is computationally as well-behaved as MMSNP,
that is, whether there is a dichotomy between PTIME and NP if the
Feder-Vardi conjecture holds.
The second application of the connection between OBDA and
MMSNP concerns query containment. It was shown in [24] that
containment between MMSNP sentences is decidable. We use this
result to prove that query containment is decidable for many OBDA
languages based on UCQs, including (ALC,UCQ) and (GF,UCQ).
Note that this refers to a very general form of query contain-
ment in OBDA, as recently introduced and studied in [10]. For
(ALCF,AQ), this problem (and every other decision problem dis-
cussed below) turns out to be undecidable.
In Section 5, we consider OBDA languages based on atomic
queries and establish a tight connection to (certain generalizations
of) CSPs. This connection is most easily stated for Boolean atomic
queries (BAQs): we prove that (ALC,BAQ) captures the query lan-
guage that consists of all Boolean queries deﬁnable as the com-
plement of a CSP. Similarly (ALC,AQ) extended with the uni-

versal role captures the query language that consists of all unary
queries deﬁnable as the complement of a generalized CSP, which
is given by a ﬁnite collection of structures enriched with a con-
stant symbol. We then proceed to transfer results from the CSP
literature to the ontology-mediated query languages (ALC, BAQ)
and (ALC, AQ). First we immediately obtain that the existence
of a PTIME/CONP dichotomy for these ontology-mediated query
languages is equivalent to the Feder-Vardi conjecture. Then we
show that query containment is not only decidable (as we could
already conclude from the connection with coMMSNP described
in Section 4), but, in fact, NEXPTIME-complete. Finally, taking
advantage of recent results for CSPs [35, 26, 13], we are able
to show that FO-rewritability and datalog-rewritability, as proper-
ties of ontology-mediated queries, are decidable and NEXPTIME-
complete for (ALC, AQ) and (ALC,BAQ).
The results in Sections 4 and 5 just summarized are actually
proved not only for ALC, but also for several of its extensions. This
relies on the equivalences between DL-based OBDA-languages es-
tablished in Section 3.
Related Work A connection between query answering in DLs
and the negation-free fragment of disjunctive datalog was ﬁrst
discovered and utilized in the inﬂuential [39, 29], see also [44].
This research is concerned with answer-preserving translations of
ontology-mediated queries into disjunctive datalog. In contrast to
the current paper, it does not consider the expressive power of
ontology-mediated queries, nor their descriptive complexity.
A
connection between DL-based OBDA and CSPs was ﬁrst found and
exploited in [36], in a setup that is different from the one studied in
this paper. In particular, instead of focusing on ontology-mediated
queries that consist of a data schema, an ontology, and a database
query, [36] concentrates on ontologies while quantifying univer-
sally over all database queries and without ﬁxing a data schema. It
establishes links to the Feder-Vardi conjecture that are incompara-
ble to the ones found in this paper, and does not consider the expres-
sive power and descriptive complexity of queries used in OBDA.
2.
PRELIMINARIES
Schemas, Instances, and Queries. A schema is a ﬁnite collec-
tion S = (S1, . . . , Sk) of relation symbols with associated arity.
A fact over S is an expression of the form S(a1, . . . , an) where
S ∈S is an n-ary relation symbol, and a1, . . . , an are elements
of some ﬁxed, countably inﬁnite set const of constants. An in-
stance D over S is a ﬁnite set of facts over S. The active domain
adom(D) of D is the set of all constants that occur in the facts
of D. We will frequently use boldface notation for tuples, such as
in a = (a1, . . . , an), and we denote by () the empty tuple.
A query over S is semantically deﬁned as a mapping q that as-
sociates with every instance D over S a set of answers q(D) ⊆
adom(D)n, where n ≥0 is the arity of q. If n = 0, then we say
that q is a Boolean query, and we write q(D) = 1 if () ∈q(D) and
q(D) = 0 otherwise.
A prominent way of specifying queries is by means of ﬁrst-order
logic (FO). Speciﬁcally, each schema S and domain-independent
FO-formula ϕ(x1, . . . , xn) that uses only relation names from S
(and, possibly, equality) give rise to the n-ary query qϕ,S, deﬁned
by setting for all S-instances D,
qϕ,S(D) = {(a1, . . . , an) ∈adom(D)n | D |= ϕ[a1, . . . , an]}.
To simplify exposition, we assume that FO-queries do not contain
constants. We use FOQ to denote the set of all ﬁrst-order queries, as
deﬁned above. Similarly, we use CQ and UCQ to refer to the class
of conjunctive queries and unions of conjunctive queries, deﬁned
as usual and allowing the use of equality. AQ denotes the set of
atomic queries, which are of the form A(x) with A a unary relation
symbol. Each of these is called a query language, which is deﬁned
abstractly as a set of queries. Besides FOQ, CQ, UCQ, and AQ, we
consider various other query languages introduced later, including
ontology-mediated ones and variants of datalog.
Two queries q1 and q2 over S are equivalent, written q1 ≡q2,
if for every S-instance D, we have q1(D) = q2(D). We say that
query language Q2 is at least as expressive as query language Q1,
written Q1 ⪯Q2, if for every query q1 ∈Q1 over some schema
S, there is a query q2 ∈Q2 over S with q1 ≡q2. Q1 and Q2 have
the same expressive power if Q1 ⪯Q2 ⪯Q1.
Ontology-Mediated Queries. We introduce the fundamentals of
ontology-based data access. An ontology language L is a fragment
of ﬁrst-order logic (i.e., a set of FO sentences), and an L-ontology
O is a ﬁnite set of sentences from L. We introduce various ontol-
ogy languages throughout the paper, including descriptions logics
and the guarded fragment.
An ontology-mediated query over a schema S is a triple
(S, O, q), where O is an ontology and q a query over S ∪sig(O),
with sig(O) the set of relation symbols used in O. Here, we call
S the data schema. Note that the ontology can introduce symbols
that are not in the data schema. As explained in the introduction,
this allows the ontology to enrich the schema of the query q. Of
course, we do not require that every relation of the data schema
needs to occur in the ontology. We have explicitly included S in
the speciﬁcation of the ontology-mediated query to emphasize that
the ontology-mediated query is interpreted as a query over S.
The semantics of an ontology-mediated query is given in terms
of certain answers, deﬁned next. A ﬁnite relational structure over
a schema S is a pair B = (dom, D) where dom is a non-empty
ﬁnite set called the domain of B and D is an instance over S with
adom(D) ⊆dom. When S is understood, we use Mod(O) to
denote the set of all ﬁnite relational structures B over S ∪sig(O)
such that B |= O. Let (S, O, q) be an ontology-mediated query
with q of arity n. The certain answers to q on an S-instance D
given O is the set certq,O(D) of tuples a ∈adom(D)n such that
for all (dom, D′) ∈Mod(O) with D ⊆D′ (that is, all models of
O that extend D), we have a ∈q(D′).
Note that all ontology languages considered in this paper enjoy
ﬁnite controllability, meaning that ﬁnite relational structures can
be replaced with unrestricted ones without changing the certain an-
swers to unions of conjunctive queries [6, 7].
Every ontology-mediated query Q = (S, O, q) can be seman-
tically interpreted as a query qQ over S by setting qQ(D) =
certq,O(D) for all S-instances D. Taking this view one step fur-
ther, each choice of an ontology language L and query language Q
gives rise to a query language, denoted (L, Q), deﬁned as the set
of queries q(S,O,q) with S a schema, O an L-ontology, and q ∈Q
a query over S ∪sig(O). We refer to such query languages (L, Q)
as ontology-mediated query languages (or, OBDA languages).
Example 1 The left-hand side of Table 1 shows an ontology O
that is formulated in the guarded fragment of FO. Consider the
ontology-mediated query (S, O, q) with data schema and query
S = {ErythemaMigrans, LymeDisease,
HereditaryPredisposition, ﬁnding, diagnosis, parent}
q(x) = ∃y( diagnosis(x, y) ∧BacterialInfection(y) ).
For the instance D over S that consists of the facts
ﬁnding(pat1, jan12ﬁnd1)
ErythemaMigrans(jan12ﬁnd1)
diagnosis(pat2, may7diag2)
Listeriosis(may7diag2)

∀x( ∃y(ﬁnding(x, y) ∧ErythemaMigrans(y))
∃ﬁnding.ErythemaMigrans ⊑∃diagnosis.LymeDisease
→∃y(diagnosis(x, y) ∧LymeDisease(y)) )
∀x( (LymeDisease(x) ∨Listeriosis(x)) →BacterialInfection(x) )
LymeDisease ⊔Listeriosis ⊑BacterialInfection
∀x( ∃y.(HereditaryDisposition(y) ∧parent(x, y)) →HereditaryDisposition(y)) )
∃parent.HereditaryDisposition ⊑HereditaryDisposition
Table 1: Example ontology, presented in (the guarded fragment of) ﬁrst-order logic and the DL ALC
⊤∗(x) = ⊤
(C ⊓D)∗(x) = C∗(x) ∧D∗(x)
⊥∗(x) = ⊥
(C ⊔D)∗(x) = C∗(x) ∨D∗(x)
A∗(x) = A(x)
(∃R.C)∗(x) = ∃y R(x, y) ∧C∗(y)
(¬C)∗(x) = ¬C∗(x)
(∀R.C)∗(x) = ∀y R(x, y) →C∗(y)
Table 2: First-order translation of ALC-concepts
we have certq,O(D) = {pat1, pat2}.
Description Logics for Specifying Ontologies.
In description
logic, schemas are generally restricted to relations of arity one
and two, called concept names and role names, respectively. For
brevity, we speak of binary schemas. We brieﬂy review the basic
description logic ALC. Relevant extensions of ALC will be intro-
duced later on in the paper.
An ALC-concept is formed according to the syntax rule
C, D ::= A | ⊤| ⊥| ¬C | C ⊓D | C ⊔D | ∃R.C | ∀R.C
where A ranges over concept names and R over role names. An
ALC-ontology O is a ﬁnite set of concept inclusions C ⊑D,
with C and D ALC-concepts. We deﬁne the semantics of ALC-
concepts by translation to FO-formulas with one free variable, as
shown in Table 2. An ALC-ontology O then translates into the set
of FO-sentences O∗= {∀x.(C∗(x) →D∗(x)) | C ⊑D ∈O}.
On the right-hand side of Table 1, we show the ALC-version of the
guarded fragment ontology displayed on the left-hand side. Note
that, although the translation is equivalence-preserving in this case,
in general, the guarded fragment is a more expressive ontology lan-
guage than ALC. Throughout the paper, we do not explicitly dis-
tinguish between a DL ontology and its translation into FO.
We remark that, from a DL perspective, the above deﬁnitions of
instances and certain answers correspond to making the standard
name assumption (SNA) in ABoxes, which in particular implies the
unique name assumption. We make the SNA only to facilitate uni-
form presentation; the SNA is inessential for the results presented
in this paper.
Example 2 Let O and S be as in Example 1.
For q1(x) =
BacterialInfection(x), the ontology-mediated query (S, O, q1) is
equivalent to the union of conjunctive queries LymeDisease(x) ∨
Listeriosis(x).
For q2(x)
=
HereditaryDisposition(x), the
ontology-mediated query (S, O, q2) is equivalent to the query de-
ﬁned by the datalog program
P(x)
←
HereditaryDisposition(x)
goal(x)
←
P(x)
P(x)
←
parent(y, x) ∧P(y)
but not to any ﬁrst-order query.
3.
OBDA AND DISJUNCTIVE DATALOG
We show that for many OBDA languages, there is a natural frag-
ment of disjunctive datalog with exactly the same expressive power.
A disjunctive datalog rule ρ has the form
S1(x1) ∨· · · ∨Sm(xm) ←R1(y1) ∧· · · ∧Rn(yn)
with m ≥0 and n > 0. We refer to S1(x1)∨· · ·∨Sm(xm) as the
head of ρ, and to R1(y1) ∧. . . ∧Rn(yn) as the body of ρ. Every
variable that occurs in the head of a rule ρ is required to also occur
in the body of ρ. Empty rule heads are denoted ⊥. A disjunctive
datalog (DDlog) program Π is a ﬁnite set of disjunctive datalog
rules with a selected goal predicate goal that does not occur in rule
bodies and only in goal rules of the form goal(x) ←R1(x1) ∧
· · · ∧Rn(xn). The arity of Π is the arity of the goal relation.
Relation symbols that occur in the head of at least one rule of Π
are intensional (IDB) predicates of Π, and all remaining relation
symbols in Π are extensional (EDB) predicates.
Every DDlog program Π of arity n naturally deﬁnes an n-ary
query qΠ over the schema S that consists of the EDB predicates
of Π: for every instance D over S, we have
qΠ(D) = {a ∈adom(D)n | goal(a) ∈D′
for all D′ ∈Mod(Π) with D ⊆D′}.
Here, Mod(Π) denotes the set of all instances over S′ that sat-
isfy all rules in Π, with S′ the set of all IDB and EDB predicates
in Π. Note that the DDlog programs considered in this paper are
negation-free. Restricted to this fragment, there is no difference
between the different semantics of DDlog studied e.g. in [21].
We use adom(x) in rule bodies as a shorthand for “x is in the
active domain of the EDB predicates”. Speciﬁcally, whenever we
use adom in a rule of a DDlog program Π, we assume that adom
is an IDB predicate and that the program Π includes all rules of the
form adom(x) ←R(x) where R is an EDB predicate of Π and x
is a tuple of distinct variables that includes x.
A monadic disjunctive datalog (MDDlog) program is a DDlog
program in which all IDB predicates with the possible exception of
goal are monadic. We use MDDlog to denote the query language
that consists of all queries deﬁned by an MDDlog program.
3.1
Ontologies Speciﬁed in Description Logics
We show that (ALC,UCQ) has the same expressive power as
MDDlog and identify a fragment of MDDlog that has the same ex-
pressive power as (ALC,AQ). In addition, we consider the exten-
sions of ALC with inverse roles, role hierarchies, transitive roles,
and the universal role, which we also relate to MDDlog and its
fragments. To match the syntax of ALC and its extensions, we
generally assume schemas to be binary throughout this section.1
(ALC,UCQ) and MDDlog. The ﬁrst main result of this section is
Theorem 1 below, which relates (ALC,UCQ) and MDDlog.
Theorem 1 (ALC,UCQ) and MDDlog have the same expressive
power.
1In fact, this assumption is inessential for Theorems 1 and 3 (which
speak about UCQs), but required for Theorems 2, 4, and 5 (which
speak about AQs) to hold.

Proof. (sketch) We start with giving some intuitions about an-
swering (ALC,UCQ) queries which guide our translation of such
queries into MDDlog programs. Recall that the deﬁnition of certain
answers to an ontology-mediated query on an instance D involves
a quantiﬁcation over all models of O which extend D. It turns
out that in the case of (ALC,UCQ) queries (and, as we will see
later, more generally for (UNFO,UCQ) queries), it sufﬁces to con-
sider a particular type of extensions of D that we term pointwise
extensions. Intuitively, such an extension of D corresponds to at-
taching domain-disjoint structures to the elements of D. Formally,
for instances D ⊆D′, we call D′ a pointwise extension of D if
D′ \ D is the union of instances {D′
a | a ∈adom(D)} such that
adom(D′
a) ∩adom(D) ⊆{a} and adom(D′
a) ∩adom(D′
b) = ∅
for a ̸= b. The fact that we need only consider models of O which
are pointwise extensions of D is helpful because it constrains the
ways in which a CQ can be satisﬁed. Speciﬁcally, every homomor-
phism h from q to D′ gives rise to a query q′ obtained from q by
identifying all variables that h sends to the same element, and to
a decomposition of q′ into a collection of components q′
0, . . . , q′
k
where the ‘core component’ q′
0 comprises all atoms of q′ whose
variables h sends to elements of D and for each D′
a in the image of
h, there is a ‘non-core component’ q′
i, 1 ≤i ≤k, such that q′
i com-
prises all atoms of q′ whose variables h sends to elements of D′
a.
Note that the non-core components are pairwise variable-disjoint
and share at most one variable with the core component.
We now detail the translation from an ontology-mediated query
(S, O, q) ∈(ALC,UCQ) into an equivalent MDDlog program. Let
sub(O) be the set of subconcepts (that is, syntactic subexpressions)
of concepts that occur in O, and let cl(O, q) denote the union of
sub(O) and the set of all CQs that have at most one free variable,
use only symbols from q, and whose number of atoms is bounded
by the number of atoms of q. A type (for O and q) is a subset of
cl(O, q). The CQs present in cl(O, q) include all potential ‘non-
core components’ from the intuitive explanation above. The free
variable of a CQ in cl(O, q) (if any) represents the overlap between
the core component and the non-core component.
We introduce a fresh unary relation symbol Pτ for every type τ,
and we denote by S′ the schema that extends S with these addi-
tional symbols. In the MDDlog program that we aim to construct,
the relation symbols Pτ will be used as IDB relations, and the sym-
bols from S will be the EBD relations.
We will say that a relational structure B over S′ ∪sig(O) is
type-coherent if Pτ(d) ∈B just in the case that
τ
=
{q′ ∈cl(O, q) | q′ Boolean , B |= q′} ∪
{C ∈cl(O, q) | C unary, B |= C[d]}.
Set k equal to the maximum of 2 and the width of q, that is, the
number of variables that occur in q. By a diagram, we mean a
conjunction δ(x1, . . . , xn) of atomic formulas over the schema S′,
with n ≤k variables. A diagram δ(x) is realizable if there exists
a type-coherent B ∈Mod(O) that satisﬁes ∃xδ(x). A diagram
δ(x) implies q(x′), with x′ a sequence of variables from x, if every
type-coherent B ∈Mod(O) that satisﬁes δ(x) under some variable
assignment, satisﬁes q(x′) under the same assignment.
The desired MDDlog program Π consists of the following col-
lections of rules:
_
τ⊆cl(O,q)
Pτ(x) ←adom(x)
⊥←δ(x) for all non-realizable diagrams δ(x)
goal(x′) ←δ(x) for all diagrams δ(x) that imply q(x′)
Intuitively, these rules ‘guess’ a pointwise extension D′ of D.
Speciﬁcally, the types Pτ guessed in the ﬁrst line determine which
subconcepts of O are made true at each element of D′.
Since
MDDlog does not support existential quantiﬁers, the D′
a parts of
D′ cannot be guessed explicitly. Instead, the CQs included in the
guessed types determine those non-core component queries that
matched in the D′
a parts. The second line ensures coherence of the
guesses and the last line guarantees that q has the required match
in D′. It is proved in the full version of this paper that the MDDlog
query qΠ is indeed equivalent to (S, O, q).
For the converse direction, let Π be an MDDlog program. For
each unary IDB relation A of Π, we introduce two fresh unary re-
lations, denoted by A and ¯A. The ontology O enforces that ¯A
represents the complement of A, that is, it consists of all inclusions
of the form
⊤⊑(A ⊔¯A) ⊓¬(A ⊓¯A).
Let q be the union of (i) all conjunctive queries that constitute the
body of a goal rule, as well as (ii) all conjunctive queries obtained
from a non-goal rule of the form
A1(x1) ∨· · · ∨Am(xm) ←R1(y1) ∧· · · ∧Rn(yn)
by taking the conjunctive query
¯A1(x1) ∧· · · ∧¯Am(xm) ∧R1(y1) ∧· · · ∧Rn(yn).
It can be shown that the ontology-mediated query (S, O, q), where
S is the schema that consists of the EDB relations of Π, is equiva-
lent to the query deﬁned by Π.
J
ALC with Atomic Queries. We characterize (ALC,AQ) by a
fragment of MDDlog. This query language has the same expres-
sive power as the OBDA language (ALC,ConQ), where ConQ de-
notes the set of all ALC-concept queries, that is, queries C(x)
with C a (possibly compound) ALC-concept. Speciﬁcally, each
query (S, O, q) ∈(ALC, ConQ) with q = C(x) can be ex-
pressed as a query (S, O′, A(x)) ∈(ALC, AQ) where A is a
fresh concept name (that is, it does not occur in S ∪sig(O)) and
O′ = O ∪{C ⊑A}. As a consequence, (ALC,AQ) also has the
same expressive power as (ALC, TCQ), where TCQ is the set of
all CQs that take the form of a directed tree with a single answer
variable at the root.
Each disjunctive datalog rule can be associated with an undi-
rected graph whose nodes are the variables that occur in the rule
and whose edges reﬂect co-occurrence of two variables in an atom
in the rule body. We say that a rule is connected if its graph is
connected, and that a DDlog program is connected if all its rules
are connected. An MDDlog program is simple if each rule contains
at most one atom R(x) with R an EDB relation; additionally, we
require that, in this atom, every variable occurs at most once.
Theorem 2 (ALC,AQ) has the same expressive power as unary
connected simple MDDlog.
Proof.
(sketch) The translation from (ALC,AQ) to unary con-
nected simple MDDlog queries is a modiﬁed version of the trans-
lation given in the proof of Theorem 1. Assume that (S, O, q) with
q = A(x) is given. We now take types to be subsets of sub(O) and
then deﬁne diagrams exactly as before (with k = 2). The MDDlog
program Π consists of the following rules:
_
τ⊆sub(O)
Pτ(x) ←adom(x)
⊥←δ(x) for all non-realizable diagrams δ(x)
of the form Pτ1(x) ∧Pτ2(x),
Pτ(x) ∧A(x), or
Pτ1(x1) ∧S(x1, x2) ∧Pτ2(x2)
goal(x) ←Pτ(x) for all Pτ with A ∈Pτ

Clearly, Π is unary, connected, and simple. Equivalence of the
queries (S, O, q) and qΠ is proved in the full version of this paper.
Conversely, let Π be a unary connected simple MDDlog pro-
gram. It is easy to rewrite each rule of Π into an equivalent ALC-
concept inclusion, where goal is now regarded as a concept name.
For example, goal(x) ←R(x, y) is rewritten into ∃R.⊤⊑goal
and P1(x) ∨P2(y) ←R(x, y) ∧A(x) ∧B(y) is rewritten into
A ⊓∃R.(B ⊓¬P2) ⊑P1. Let O be the resulting ontology and
let q = goal(x). Then the query qΠ is equivalent to the query
(S, O, q), where S consists of the EDB relations in Π.
J
Note that the connectedness condition is required since one cannot
express MDDlog rules such as goal(x) ←adom(x) ∧A(y) with
y ̸= x in (ALC,AQ). Multiple variable occurrences in EDB rela-
tions have to be excluded because programs such as goal(x) ←
A(x), ⊥←R(x, x) (return all elements in A if the instance con-
tains no reﬂexive R-edge, and return the active domain otherwise)
also cannot be expressed in (ALC,AQ).
Extensions of ALC. We identify several standard extensions of
(ALC,UCQ) and (ALC,AQ) that have the same expressive power,
and some that do not. We introduce the relevant extensions only
brieﬂy and refer to [4] for more details.
ALCI is the extension of ALC in which one can state that a role
name R is the inverse of a role name S, that is, ∀xy(R(x, y) ↔
S(y, x)); ALCH is the extension in which one can state that a
role name R is included in a role name S, that is, ∀xy(R(x, y) →
S(x, y)); S is the extension of ALC in which one can require some
roles names to be interpreted as transitive relations; ALCF is the
extension in which one can state that some role names are inter-
preted as partial functions; and ALCU is the extension with the
universal role U, interpreted as dom × dom in any relational struc-
ture B with domain dom. Note that U should be regarded as a log-
ical symbol and is not a member of any schema. All these means
of expressivity are included in the OWL2 DL proﬁle of the W3C-
standardized ontology language OWL2 [47].
We use the usual naming scheme to denote combinations of
these extensions, for example ALCHI for the union of ALCH
and ALCI and SHI for the union of S and ALCHI. The follow-
ing result summarizes the expressive power of extensions of ALC.
Theorem 3
1. (ALCHIU,UCQ) has the same expressive power as MDDlog
and as (ALC,UCQ).
2. (S,UCQ) and (ALCF,UCQ) are strictly more expressive than
(ALC,UCQ).
Proof. (sketch) In Point 1, we start with (ALCIU,UCQ), for which
the result follows from Theorem 6 in Section 3.2 since ALCIU is
a fragment of UNFO. Role inclusions ∀xy(R(x, y) →S(x, y))
do not add expressive power since they can be simulated by adding
to the ontology the inclusions ∃R.C ⊑∃S.C for all C ∈sub(O),
and replacing every atom S(x, y) in the UCQ by R(x, y)∨S(x, y).
For Point 2, we separate (S,UCQ) from (ALC,UCQ) by show-
ing that the following ontology-mediated query (S1, O1, q1) can-
not be expressed in (ALC,UCQ): S1 consists of two role names
R and S, O1 states that these role names are both transitive, and
q1 = ∃xy(R(x, y) ∧S(x, y)). For (ALCF,UCQ), we show that
(S2, O2, q2) cannot be expressed in (ALC,UCQ), where S2 con-
sists of role name R and concept name A, O2 states that R is func-
tional, and q2 = A(x). Detailed proofs are provided in the full ver-
sion of this paper. They rely on a characterization of (ALC,UCQ)
in terms of colored forbidden patterns [38], which is a by-product
of the connection between (ALC,UCQ) and MMSNP that will be
established in Section 4.
J
The next result is interesting when contrasted with Point 2 of Theo-
rem 3: when (ALC,UCQ) is replaced with (ALC,AQ), then the ad-
dition of transitive roles no longer increases the expressive power.
Theorem 4 (ALC,AQ)
has
the
same
expressive
power
as
(SHI,AQ).
Proof. (sketch) The proof of Theorem 2 given above actually shows
that unary connected simple MDDlog is at least as expressive as
(ALCI,AQ). Thus, (ALC,AQ) has the same expressive power as
(ALCI,AQ). Now it is folklore that in ALCI transitive roles can
be replaced by certain concept inclusions without changing the cer-
tain answers to atomic queries. This can be done similarly to the
elimination of role inclusions in the proof above, see [39, 45]. Thus
(ALCI,AQ) has the same expressive power as (SHI,AQ), and the
result follows.
J
It follows from [45] that this observation can be extended to all
complex role inclusions that are admitted in the description logic
SROIQ. In contrast, the addition of the universal role on the
side of the OBDA query language extends the expressive power
of (ALC,AQ). Namely, it corresponds, on the MDDlog side, to
dropping the requirement that rule bodies must be connected. For
example, the MDDlog query goal(x) ←adom(x)∧A(y) can then
be expressed using the ontology O = {∃U.A ⊑goal} and the AQ
goal(x).
Theorem 5 (ALCU,AQ) and (SHIU,AQ) both have the same ex-
pressive power as unary simple MDDlog.
We close this section with a brief remark about Boolean atomic
queries (BAQs), that is, queries of the form ∃x.A(x), where A is
a unary relation symbol. Such queries will be considered in Sec-
tion 5. It is possible to establish modiﬁed versions of Theorems 2
to Theorem 5 above in which AQs are replaced by BAQs and unary
goal predicates by 0-ary goal-predicate, respectively.
3.2
Ontologies Speciﬁed in First-Order Logic
Ontologies formulated in description logic are not able to speak
about relation symbols of arity greater than two.2 To overcome this
restriction, we consider the guarded fragment of ﬁrst-order logic
and the unary-negation fragment of ﬁrst-order logic [6, 46]. Both
generalize the description logic ALC in different ways. We also
consider their natural common generalization, the guarded nega-
tion fragment of ﬁrst-order logic [7]. Our results from the previous
subsection turn out to generalize to all these fragments. We start by
considering the unary negation fragment.
The unary-negation fragment of ﬁrst-order logic (UNFO) [46]
is the fragment of ﬁrst-order logic that consists of those formulas
that are generated from atomic formulas, including equality, us-
ing conjunction, disjunction, existential quantiﬁcation, and unary
negation, that is, negation applied to a formula with at most one
free variable. Thus, for example, ¬∃xyR(x, y) belongs to UNFO,
whereas ∃xy¬R(x, y) does not. It is easy to show that every ALC-
TBox is equivalent to a UNFO sentence.
2There are actually a few DLs that can handle relations of unre-
stricted arity, such as those presented in [19]. We do not consider
such DLs in this paper, but remark that large fragments of them can
be translated into UNFO.

Theorem 6 (UNFO,UCQ) has the same expressive power as
MDDlog.
Proof. (sketch) The translation from MDDlog to (UNFO,UCQ)
is given by Theorem 1.
Here, we provide the translation from
(UNFO,UCQ) to MDDlog. Let Q = (S, O, q) ∈(UNFO,UCQ)
be given. We assume that O is a single UNFO sentence that is in
the normal form generated by the following grammar:
ϕ(x) ::= ⊤| ¬ϕ(x) | ∃y(ψ1(x, y) ∧· · · ∧ψn(x, y))
where each ψi is either a relational atom or a formula with at most
one free variable generated by the same grammar, and the free vari-
ables in ψi are among x, y. Note that no equality is used and that
all generated formulas have at most one free variable. Easy syn-
tactic manipulations show that every UNFO-formula with at most
one free variable is equivalent to a disjunction of formulas gener-
ated by the above grammar. In the case of O, we may further-
more assume that it is a single such sentence, rather than a disjunc-
tion, because certq,O1∨O2(D) is the intersection of certq,O1(D)
and certq,O2(D), and MDDlog is closed under taking intersections
of queries.
Let sub(O) be the set of all subformulas of O with at most one
free variable z (we apply a one-to-one renaming of variables as
needed to ensure that each formula in sub(O) with a free variable
has the same free variable z). Let k be the maximum of the number
of variables in O and the number of variables in q. We denote by
clk(O) the set of all formulas ϕ(x) of the form
∃y(ψ1(x, y) ∧· · · ∧ψn(x, y))
with y = (y1, . . . , ym), m ≤k, where each ψi is either a relational
atom that uses a symbol from q or is of the form χ(x) or χ(yi), for
χ(z) ∈sub(O). Note that, as in the proof of Theorem 1, clk(O)
contains all CQs that use only symbols from q and whose size is
bounded by the size of q. A type τ is a subset of clk(O); the set of
all types is denoted type(O).
We introduce a fresh unary relation symbol Pτ for each type τ,
and we denote by S′ the schema that extends S with these addi-
tional relations. As before, we call a structure B over S′ ∪sig(O)
type-coherent if for all types τ and elements d in the domain of B,
we have Pτ(d) ∈B just in the case that τ is the (unique) type
realized at d in B. Diagrams, realizability, and “implying q” are
deﬁned as in the proof of Theorem 1. It follows from [46] that it
is decidable whether a diagram implies a query, and whether a di-
agram is realizable. The MDDlog program Π is deﬁned as in the
proof of Theorem 1, except that now in the ﬁrst rule, τ ranges over
types in type(O). In the full version of this paper, we prove that
the resulting MDDlog query qΠ is equivalent to Q.
J
Next, we consider the guarded fragment of ﬁrst-order logic (GF).
It comprises all formulas built up from atomic formulas using
the Boolean connectives and guarded quantiﬁcation of the form
∃x(α∧ϕ) and ∀x(α →ϕ), where, in both cases, α is an atomic for-
mula (a “guard”) that contains all free variables of ϕ. To simplify
the presentation of the results, we consider here the equality-free
version of the guarded fragment. We do allow one special case of
equality, namely the use of trivial equalities of the form x = x as
guards, which is equivalent to allowing unguarded quantiﬁers ap-
plied to formulas with at most one free variable. This restricted
form of equality is sufﬁcient to translate every ALC TBox into an
equivalent sentence of GF.
It turns out that the OBDA language (GF, UCQ) is strictly more
expressive than MDDlog.
Proposition 1 The Boolean query
(†) there are a1, . . . , an, b, for some n ≥2, such that A(a1),
B(an), and P(ai, b, ai+1) for all 1 ≤i < n
is deﬁnable in (GF,UCQ) and not in MDDlog.
Proof. Let S consist of unary predicates A, B and a ternary predi-
cate P, and let Q be the S-query deﬁned by (†). It is easy to check
that Q can be expressed by the (GF,UCQ) query qS,O,∃xU(x) where
O
=
∀xyz (P(x, z, y) →(A(x) →R(z, x))) ∧
∀xyz (P(x, z, y) →(R(z, x) →R(z, y))) ∧
∀xyz (R(x, y) →(B(y) →U(y)))
We show in the full version of this paper that Q is not expressible
in MDDlog using the colored forbidden patterns characterization
mentioned in the proof sketch of Theorem 3.
J
As fragments of ﬁrst-order logic, the unary-negation fragment
and the guarded fragment are incomparable in expressive power.
They have a common generalization, which is known as the
guarded-negation fragment (GNFO) [8]. This fragment is deﬁned
in the same way as UNFO, except that, besides unary negation, we
allow guarded negation of the form α ∧¬ϕ, where the guard α
is an atomic formula that contains all the variables of ϕ. Again,
for simplicity, we consider here the equality-free version of the
language, except that we allow the use of trivial equalities of the
form x = x as guards. As we will see, for the purpose of OBDA,
GNFO is no more powerful than GF. Speciﬁcally, (GF, UCQ) and
(GNFO, UCQ) are expressively equivalent to a natural generaliza-
tion of MDDlog, namely frontier-guarded DDlog. Recall that a
datalog rule is guarded if its body includes an atom that contains all
variables which occur in the rule [27]. A weaker notion of guard-
edness, which we call here frontier-guardedness, inspired by [5,
7], requires that, for each atom α in the head of the rule, there is
an atom β in the rule body such that all variables that occur in α
occur also in β. We deﬁne a frontier-guarded DDlog query to be a
query deﬁned by a DDlog program in which every rule is frontier-
guarded. Observe that frontier-guarded DDlog subsumes MDDlog.
Theorem 7 (GF,UCQ) and (GNFO,UCQ) have the same expres-
sive power as frontier-guarded DDlog.
Theorem 7 is proved in the full version of this paper via transla-
tions from (GNFO,UCQ) to frontier-guarded DDlog and back that
are along the same lines as the translations from (UNFO,UCQ) to
MDDlog and back. In addition, we use a result from [8] to obtain
a translation from (GNFO,UCQ) to (GF,UCQ).
4.
OBDA AND MMSNP
We show that MDDlog captures coMMSNP and thus, by the re-
sults obtained in the previous section, the same is true for many
OBDA languages based on UCQs. We then use this connection
to transfer results from MMSNP to OBDA languages with UCQs,
linking the data complexity of these languages to the Feder-Vardi
conjecture and establishing decidability of query containment. We
also propose GMSNP, an extension of MMSNP inspired by frontier
guarded DDlog, and show that (GF,UCQ) and (GNFO,UCQ) cap-
ture coGMSNP, and that GMSNP has the same expressive power
as a previously proposed extension of MMSNP called MMSNP2.
An
MMSNP
formula
over
schema
S
has
the
form
∃X1 · · · ∃Xn∀x1 · · · ∀xmϕ with X1, . . . , Xn monadic second-
order (SO) variables, x1, . . . , xm FO-variables, and ϕ a conjunc-
tion of quantiﬁer-free formulas of the form
ψ = α1 ∧· · · ∧αn →β1 ∨· · · ∨βm with n, m ≥0,

where each αi is of the form Xi(x), R(x) (with R ∈S), or x = y,
and each βi is of the form Xi(x). In order to use MMSNP as a
query language, and in contrast to the standard deﬁnition, we ad-
mit free FO-variables and speak of sentences to refer to MMSNP
formulas without free variables. To connect with the query lan-
guages studied thus far, we are interested in queries obtained by
the complements of MMSNP formulas: each MMSNP formula Φ
over schema S with n free variables gives rise to a query
qΦ,S(D) = {a ∈adom(D)n | (adom(D), D) ̸|= Φ[a]}
where we set (adom(D), D) |= Φ to true when D is the empty
instance (that is, adom(D) = ∅) and Φ is a sentence. We observe
that the resulting query language coMMSNP has the same expres-
sive power as MDDlog.
Proposition 2 coMMSNP and MDDlog have the same expressive
power.
Proof. Let Φ = ∃X1 · · · ∃Xn∀x1 · · · ∀xmϕ be an MMSNP for-
mula with free variables y1, . . . , yk, and let qΦ,S ∈coMMSNP be
the corresponding query. We can assume w.l.o.g. that all implica-
tions ψ = α1∧· · ·∧αn →β1∨· · ·∨βm in ϕ satisfy the following
properties: (i) n > 0 and, (ii) each variable that occurs in a βi atom
also occurs in an αi atom. In fact, we can achieve both (i) and (ii)
by replacing violating implications ψ with the set of implications
ψ′ that can be obtained from ψ by adding, for each variable x that
occurs only in the head of ψ, an atom S(x) where S is a predicate
that occurs in Φ and x is a tuple of variables that contains x once
and otherwise only fresh variables that do not occur in Φ. Deﬁne an
MDDlog program ΠΦ that consists of all implications in ϕ whose
head is not ⊥plus a rule
goal(y1, . . . , yk) ←ϑ ∧adom(y1) ∧· · · ∧adom(yk)
for each implication ϑ →⊥in ϕ. It can be proved that qΦ,S =
qΠΦ,S for all schemas S. Finally, it is straightforward to remove
the equalities from the rule bodies in ΠΦ.
Conversely, let Π be a k-ary MDDlog program and assume
w.l.o.g. that each rule uses a disjoint set of variables.
Reserve
fresh variables y1, . . . , yk as free variables for the desired MM-
SNP formula, and let X1, . . . , Xn be the IDB predicates in Π and
x1, . . . , xm the FO-variables in Π that do not occur in the goal
predicate. Set ΦΠ = ∃X1 · · · ∃Xn∀x1 · · · ∀xmϕ where ϕ is the
conjunction of all non-goal rules in Π plus the implication ϑ′ →⊥
for each rule goal(x) ←ϑ in Π. Here, ϑ′ is obtained from ϑ
by replacing each variable x ∈x whose left-most occurrence in
the rule head is in the i-th position with yi, and then conjunctively
adding yi = yj whenever the i-th and j-th position in the rule head
have the same variable. It can be proved that qΠ,S = qΦΠ,S for all
schemas S.
J
Thus, the characterizations of OBDA languages in terms of
MDDlog provided in Section 3 also establish the descriptive com-
plexity of these languages by identifying them with (the comple-
ment of) MMSNP. Furthermore, Proposition 2 allow us to trans-
fer results from MMSNP to OBDA. We start by considering the
data complexity of the query evaluation problem: for a query q,
the evaluation problem is to decide, given an instance D and a tu-
ple a of elements from D, whether a ∈q(D). Our ﬁrst result is
that the Feder-Vardi dichotomy conjecture for CSPs is true if and
only if there is a dichotomy between PTIME and CONP for query
evaluation in (ALC,UCQ), and the same is true for several other
OBDA languages. For brevity, we say that a query language has a
dichotomy between PTIME and CONP, referring only implicitly to
the evaluation problem.
The proof of the following theorem relies on Proposition 2 and
Theorems 1, 3, and 6. It also exploits the fact that the Feder-Vardi
dichotomy conjecture can equivalently be stated for MMSNP sen-
tences [24, 33]. Some technical development is needed to deal with
the presence of free variables. Details are in the full version of this
paper.
Theorem 8 (ALC,UCQ) has a dichotomy between PTIME and
CONP iff the Feder-Vardi conjecture holds. The same is true for
(ALCHIU,UCQ) and (UNFO,UCQ).
Recall that (ALCF,UCQ) and (S,UCQ) are two extensions of
(ALC,UCQ) that were identiﬁed in Section 3 to be more expres-
sive than (ALC,UCQ) itself. It was already proved in [36] (The-
orem 27) that, compared to ontology-mediated queries based on
ALC, the functional roles of ALCF dramatically increase the
computational power. This is true even for atomic queries.
Theorem 9 ([36]) For every NP-Turing machine M, there is a
query q in (ALCF,AQ) such that the complement of the word
problem of M has the same complexity as evaluating q, up to
polynomial-time reductions. Consequently, (ALCF,AQ) does not
have a dichotomy between PTIME and CONP (unless PTIME =
NP).
We leave it as an open problem to analyze the computational power
of (S,UCQ).
There are other interesting results that can be transferred from
MMSNP to OBDA. Here, we consider query containment. Specif-
ically, the following general containment problem was proposed in
[10] as a powerful tool for OBDA: given ontology-mediated queries
(S, Oi, qi), i ∈{1, 2}, decide whether for all S-instances D, we
have certq1,O1(D) ⊆certq2,O2(D).3
Applications include the
optimization of ontology-mediated queries and managing the ef-
fects on query answering of replacing an ontology with a new, up-
dated version. In terms of OBDA languages such as (ALC,UCQ),
the above problem corresponds to query containment in the stan-
dard sense: an S-query q1 is contained in an S-query q2, written
q1 ⊆q2, if for every S-instance D, we have q1(D) ⊆q2(D).
Note that there are also less general (and computationally simpler)
notions of query containment in OBDA that do not ﬁx the data
schema [19].
It was proved in [24] that containment of MMSNP sentences
is decidable. We thus obtain the following result for OBDA lan-
guages.
Theorem 10 Query containment is decidable for the OBDA lan-
guages (ALC,UCQ), (ALCHIU,UCQ), and (UNFO,UCQ).
Note that this result is considerably stronger than those in [10],
which considered only containment of ontology-mediated queries
(S, O, q) with q an atomic query since already this basic case
turned out to be technically intricate. The treatment of CQs and
UCQs was left open, including all cases stated in Theorem 10.
We now consider OBDA languages based on the guarded frag-
ment and GNFO. By Proposition 1, (GF,UCQ) and (GNFO,UCQ)
are strictly more expressive than MDDlog and we cannot use
Proposition 2 to relate these query languages to the Feder-Vardi
conjecture. Theorem 7 suggests that it would be useful to have
3In fact, this deﬁnition is slightly different from the one used in
[10]. There, containment is deﬁned only over instances D that are
consistent w.r.t. O1 and O2, i.e., where there is at least one ﬁnite
S-structure (dom, D′) such that D ⊆D′ and D′ ∈Mod(Oi).

a generalization of MMSNP that is equivalent to frontier-guarded
DDlog. Such a generalization is introduced next.
A formula of guarded monotone strict NP (abbreviated GM-
SNP) has the form ∃X1 · · · ∃Xn∀x1 · · · ∀xmϕ with X1, . . . , Xn
SO variables of any arity, x1, . . . , xn FO-variables, and ϕ a con-
junction of formulas
ψ = α1 ∧· · · ∧αn →β1 ∨· · · ∨βm with n, m ≥0,
where each αi is of the form Xi(x), R(x) (with R ∈S), or
x = y, and each βi is of the form Xi(x). Additionally, we re-
quire that for every head atom βi, there is a body atom αj such that
αj contains all variables from βi. GMSNP gives rise to a query
language coGMSNP in analogy with the deﬁnition of coMMSNP.
It can be shown by a straightforward syntactic transformation that
every MMSNP formula is equivalent to some GMSNP formula.
Together with Proposition 1 and Theorem 7, this yields the second
statement of the following lemma; the ﬁrst statement can be proved
similarly to Proposition 2.
Theorem 11 coGMSNP has the same expressive power as
frontier-guarded DDlog and is strictly more expressive than coMM-
SNP.
Although deﬁned in a different way, GMSNP is essentially the
same logic as MMSNP2, which is studied in [37]. Speciﬁcally,
MMSNP2 is the extension of MMSNP in which monadic SO-
variables range over sets of domain elements and facts, and where
atoms of the form X(R(x)) are allowed in place of atoms X(x)
with X an SO-variable and R from the data schema S. Addi-
tionally, a guardedness condition is imposed, requiring that when-
ever an atom X(R(x)) occurs in a rule head, then the atom R(x)
must occur in the rule body. Formally, the SO-variables Xi are
interpreted in an instance D as sets π(Xi) ⊆adom(D) ∪D and
D |=π X(R(x1, . . . , xn)) if R(π(x1), . . . , π(xn)) ∈π(X). We
observe the following.
Proposition 3 GMSNP and MMSNP2 have the same expressive
power.
Details for the proofs of both Theorem 11 and Lemma 3 are in the
full version of this paper. In [37], it was left as an open question
whether MMSNP2 is more expressive than MMSNP, which is re-
solved by the results above.
We leave it as an interesting open question whether Theo-
rem 8 can be extended to (GF,UCQ) and (GNFO,UCQ), that is,
whether GMSNP (equivalently: MMSNP2) has a dichotomy be-
tween PTIME and NP if the Feder-Vardi conjecture holds. While
this question is implicit already in [37], the results established in
this paper underline its signiﬁcance from a different perspective.
5.
OBDA AND CSP
We show that OBDA languages based on AQs capture CSPs
(and generalizations thereof), and we transfer results from CSPs to
OBDA languages. In comparison to the previous section, we obtain
a richer set of results, and often even worst-case optimal decision
procedures. Recall that each ﬁnite relational structure B over a
schema S gives rise to a constraint satisfaction problem which is to
decide, given a ﬁnite relational structure A over S, whether there is
a homomorphism from A to B (written A →B). In this context,
the relational structure B is also called the template of the CSP.
CSPs give rise to a query language coCSP in the spirit of the
query language coMMSNP introduced in the previous section. In
its basic version, this language is Boolean and turns out to have ex-
actly the same expressive power as (ALC,BAQ), where BAQ is the
class of Boolean atomic queries. To also cover non-Boolean AQs,
we consider two natural generalizations of CSPs. First, a general-
ized CSP is deﬁned by a ﬁnite set F of templates, rather than only
a single one [25]. The problem then consists in deciding, given an
input structure A, whether there is a template B ∈F such that
A →B. Second, in a (generalized) CSP with constant symbols,
both the template(s) and the input structure are endowed with con-
stant symbols [23, 1]. To be more precise, let S be a schema and
c = c1, . . . , cm a ﬁnite sequence of distinct constant symbols. A
ﬁnite relational structure over S ∪c has the form (A, d1, . . . , dm)
with A a ﬁnite relational structure over A that, in addition, inter-
prets the constant symbols ci by elements di of the domain dom of
A, for 1 ≤i ≤m. Let (A, a) and (B, b) be ﬁnite relational struc-
tures over S ∪c. A mapping h is a homomorphism from (A, a) to
(B, b), written (A, a) →(B, b), if it is a homomorphism from A
to B and h(ai) = bi for 1 ≤i ≤m. A (generalized) CSP with
constant symbols is then deﬁned like a (generalized) CSP, based on
this extended notion of homomorphism.
We now introduce the query languages obtained from the differ-
ent versions of CSPs, where generalized CSPs with constant sym-
bols constitute the most general case. Speciﬁcally, each ﬁnite set of
templates F over S∪c with c = c1, . . . , cm gives rise to an m-ary
query coCSP(F) that maps every S-instance D to
{d ∈adom(D)m |∀(B, b)∈F :(D, d) ̸→(B, b)},
where we view (D, d) as a ﬁnite relational structure whose do-
main is adom(D). The query language that consists of all such
queries is called generalized coCSP with constant symbols. The
fragment of this query language that is obtained by admitting only
sets of templates F without constant symbols is called generalized
coCSP, and the fragment induced by singleton sets F without con-
stant symbols is called coCSP.
Example 3 Selecting an illustrative fragment of Examples 1 and 2,
let
O = {∃parent.HereditaryDisposition ⊑HereditaryDisposition}
S = {HereditaryDisposition, parent}
Moreover, let q2(x) = HereditaryDisposition(x) be the query
from Example 2. To identify a query in coCSP with constant sym-
bols that is equivalent to the ontology-mediated query (S, O, q2),
let B be the following template:
parent
a
b
HereditaryDisposition
parent
parent
It can be shown that for all instances D over S and for all d ∈
adom(D), we have d ∈certq2,O(D) iff (D, d) ̸→(B, a) and thus
the query coCSP(B) is as required.
The following theorem summarizes the connections between
OBDA languages with (Boolean) atomic queries, MDDlog, and
CSPs. Note that we consider binary schemas only.
Theorem 12 The following are lists of query languages that have
the same expressive power:
1. (ALCU,AQ), (SHIU,AQ), unary simple MDDlog, and gener-
alized coCSP with one constant symbol;

2. (ALC,AQ), (SHI,AQ), unary connected simple MDDlog, and
generalized coCSPs with one constant symbol such that all tem-
plates are identical except for the interpretation of the constant
symbol;
3. (ALCU,BAQ), (SHIU,BAQ), Boolean simple MDDlog, and
generalized coCSP;
4. (ALC,BAQ), (SHI,BAQ), Boolean connected simple MDDlog,
and coCSP.
Moreover, given the ontology-mediated query or monadic datalog
program, the correponding CSP template is of at most exponential
size and can be constructed in time polynomial in the size of the
template.
Proof. The equivalences between OBDA languages and fragments
of MDDlog have been proved in Section 3. We give a proof of the
remaining claim of Point 1, namely that (ALCU,AQ) and general-
ized coCSP with one constant symbol are equally expressive. We
extend the notation used in the proof of Theorem 1. For simplic-
ity, throughout this proof we regard ∀R.C as an abbreviation for
¬∃R.¬C.
Let Q = (S, O, A(x)) be an ontology-mediated query formu-
lated in (ALCU,AQ). A type for O is a set τ ⊆sub(O) and tp(O)
denotes the set of all types for O. We say that τ ∈tp(O) is re-
alizable if there is an A = (dom, D) ∈Mod(O) and a d ∈dom
such that C ∈τ iff A |= C∗[d] for all C ∈sub(O). A set of
types T ⊆tp(O) is realizable in a Q-countermodel if there is an
A ∈Mod(O) that realizes exactly the types in T and such that
A ̸∈τ for at least one τ ∈T.
Let C be the set of all T ⊆tp(O) that are realizable in a Q-
countermodel and maximal with this property. Note that the num-
ber of elements of C is bounded by the size of O since for any two
distinct T1, T2 ∈C, there must be a concept ∃U.D ∈sub(O) such
that ∃U.D ∈τ for all τ ∈T1 and ∃U.D ̸∈τ for all τ ∈T2 or vice
versa; otherwise, we can take the disjoint union of any structures
A1, A2 which show that T1, T2 are realizable in a Q-countermodel
to obtain Q-countermodel that realizes T1 ∪T2. For R ∈S, we
call a pair (τ1, τ2) of types R-coherent if ∃R.C ∈τ1 for every
∃R.C ∈sub(O) such that C ∈τ2.
With each T ∈C, we associate the canonical S-structure BT
with domain T and the following facts:
• B(τ) for all τ ∈T and B ∈S such that B ∈τ;
• R(τ1, τ2) for all τ1, τ2 ∈T and R ∈S such that (τ1, τ2) is
R-coherent.
Note that the construction of BT is well-known from the literature
on modal and description logic. For example, BT can be viewed
as a ﬁnite fragment of a canonical model of a modal logic that is
constructed from maximal consistent sets of formulas [11]. Al-
ternatively, BT can be viewed as the result of a type elimination
procedure [41].
We obtain the desired set F of CSP templates by setting
F = {(BT , τ) | T ∈C, τ ∈T, A ̸∈τ}.
One can show that for every S-instance D and d ∈adom(D), there
exists (BT , τ) ∈F with (D, d) →(BT , τ) iff d ̸∈qS,O,A(x)(D).
Thus, the ontology-mediated query Q is equivalent to the query
deﬁned by F.
Conversely, assume that F is a ﬁnite set of S-structures with one
constant. Take some (B, b) ∈F, and for every d in the domain
dom(B) of B, create some fresh concept name Ad. Let A be an-
other fresh concept name, and set
OB,b
=
{Ad ⊑¬Ad′ | d ̸= d′} ∪
{Ad ⊓∃R.Ad′ ⊑⊥| R(d, d′) ̸∈B, R ∈S} ∪
{Ad ⊓B ⊑⊥| B(d) ̸∈B, B ∈S} ∪
{⊤⊑
⊔
d∈dom(B) Ad, ¬Ab ⊑A}
Consider the ontology-mediated query QB,b = (S, OB,b, A(x)).
One can show that for every S-instance D and d ∈adom(D),
(D, d) →(B, b) iff d ̸∈qQB,b(D). Thus, QB,b is the desired
query if F is a singleton. For the general case, let O be the disjunc-
tion over all OB,b with (B, b) ∈F. Note that O can be expressed
in ALCU: ﬁrst, rewrite each OB,b into a single inclusion of the
form ⊤⊑CB,b and then set
O = {⊤⊑
⊔
(B,b)∈F ∀U.CB,b}.
Using the above observation about the queries QB,b, it is not hard
to show that the (ALCU,AQ)-query Q = (S, O, A(x)) is equiva-
lent to the query coCSP(F).
This completes the proof of Point 1. The proofs of Points 2 to 4
are similar and given in the full version of this paper.
J
Theorem 12 allows us to transfer results from the CSP world to
OBDA, which, in light of recent progress on CSPs, turns out to be
very fruitful. We start with data complexity.
Theorem 13 (ALC,BAQ) has a dichotomy between PTIME and
CONP iff the Feder-Vardi conjecture holds. The same is true for
(SHIU,AQ), and (SHIU,BAQ).
Since SHIU-ontologies can be replaced by ALCU-ontologies in
ontology-mediated queries due to Theorem 5, the “if” direction of
(all cases mentioned in) Theorem 13 actually follows from Theo-
rem 8. The “only if” direction is a consequence of Theorem 12.
We now consider further interesting applications of Theorem 12,
in particular to deciding query containment, FO-rewritability, and
datalog rewritability.
5.1
Query Containment
In Section 4, we have established decidability results for query
containment in OBDA languages based on UCQs. For OBDA lan-
guages based on AQs and BAQs, we even obtain a tight complexity
bound. It is easy to see that query containment in coCSP is char-
acterized by homomorphisms between templates. Consequently,
it is straightforward to show that query containment for general-
ized coCSP with constant symbols is NP-complete. Thus, The-
orem 12 yields the following NEXPTIME upper bound for query
containment in OBDA languages. The corresponding lower bound
is proved in the full version of this paper by a non-trivial reduction
of a NEXPTIME-complete tiling problem.
Theorem 14 Query containment in (SHIU,AQ∪BQ) is in NEX-
PTIME.
It is NEXPTIME-hard already for (ALC,AQ) and for
(ALC,BAQ).
It is a consequence of a result in [10] that query containment is
undecidable for ALCF. We show in the full version of this paper
how the slight gap pointed out in Footnote 3 can be bridged.
5.2
FO- and Datalog-Rewritability
One prominent approach to answering ontology-mediated
queries is to make use of existing relational database systems or

datalog engines, eliminating the ontology by query rewriting [18,
22, 20]. Speciﬁcally, an ontology-mediated query (S, O, q) is FO-
rewritable if there exists an FO-query over S that is equivalent to
it and datalog-rewritable if there exists a datalog program over S
that deﬁnes it. We observe that every ontology-mediated query that
is FO-rewritable is also datalog-rewritable.
Proposition 4 If Q = (S, O, q) is an ontology-mediated query
with O formulated in equality-free FO and q a UCQ, then qQ is
preserved by homomorphisms. Consequently, it follows from [43]
that if qQ is FO-rewritable, then qQ is rewritable into a UCQ (thus
into datalog).
Example 2 illustrates that ontology-mediated queries are not al-
ways rewritable into an FO-query, and the same holds for datalog-
rewritability. It is a central problem to decide, given an ontology-
mediated query, whether it is FO-rewritable and whether it is
datalog-rewritable. By leveraging the CSP connection, we show
that both problems are decidable and pinpoint their complexities.
On
the
CSP
side,
FO-rewritability
corresponds
to
FO-
deﬁnability,
and
datalog-rewritability
to
datalog-deﬁnability.
Speciﬁcally, an S-query coCSP(F) is FO-deﬁnable if there is an
FO-sentence ϕ over S such that for all ﬁnite relational structures
A over S, we have A |= ϕ iff A ̸→B for all B in F. Similarly,
coCSP(F) is datalog-deﬁnable if there exists a datalog program Π
that deﬁnes it. FO-deﬁnability and datalog-deﬁnability have been
studied extensively for CSPs, culminating in the following results.
Theorem 15 Deciding, for a given ﬁnite relational structure B
without constant symbols, whether coCSP(B) is FO-deﬁnable is
NP-complete [35]. The same is true for datalog-deﬁnability [26].4
Combining the preceding theorem with Theorem 12, we ob-
tain NEXPTIME upper bounds for deciding FO-rewritability and
datalog-rewritability of queries from (SHI,BAQ).
To capture the more important AQs rather than only BAQs, we
show that Theorem 15 can be lifted, in a natural way, to general-
ized CSPs with constant symbols. The central step is provided by
Proposition 5 below. For each ﬁnite relational structure B with
constant symbols c1, . . . , cn, let us denote by Bc the correspond-
ing relational structure without constant symbols over the schema
that contains additional unary relations P1, . . . , Pn, where each Pi
denotes the singleton set that consists of the element denoted by ci.
Proposition 5 For every set of homomorphically incomparable
structures B1, . . . , Bn with constant symbols,
1. coCSP(B1, . . . , Bn) is FO-deﬁnable iff coCSP(Bc
i) is FO-
deﬁnable for 1 ≤i ≤n.
2. coCSP(B1, . . . , Bn) is datalog-deﬁnable iff coCSP(Bc
i) is
datalog-deﬁnable for 1 ≤i ≤n.
A proof of Proposition 5 is provided in the full version of this
paper. It relies on the characterization of FO-deﬁnable CSPs as
those CSPs that have ﬁnite obstruction sets; this characterization
was given in [2] for structures without constant symbols and fol-
lows from results in [43] for the case of structures with constant
symbols.
4An NP algorithm for datalog-deﬁnability is implicit in [26], based
on results from [9], see also [13]. We thank Benoit Larose and
Liber Barto for pointing this out.
Note that every set of structures B1, . . . , Bn has a sub-
set B′
1, . . . , B′
m which consists of homomorphically incompa-
rable structures such that coCSP(B1, . . . , Bn) is equivalent to
coCSP(B′
1, . . . , B′
m). We use this observation to establish the an-
nounced lifting of Theorem 15.
Theorem 16 FO-deﬁnability and datalog-deﬁnability of general-
ized CSP with constant symbols is NP-complete.
Proof. To decide whether a generalized CSP with constant symbols
given as a set of templates F = {B1, . . . , Bn} is FO-deﬁnable,
it sufﬁces to ﬁrst guess a subset F ′ ⊆F and then to verify that
(i) coCSP(Bc) is FO-deﬁnable for each B ∈F ′, and (ii) for each
B ∈F there is a B′ ∈F′ such that B →B′. By Theorem 15,
this can be done in NP. Correctness follows from Proposition 5 and
the fact that whenever there is a subset F ′ satisfying (i) and (ii),
then by the observation above there must be a subset F ′′ ⊆F ′ of
homomorphically incomparable structures such that coCSP(F ′′) is
equivalent to coCSP(F ′), which by (ii) is equivalent to coCSP(F).
Datalog-deﬁnability can be decided analogously.
J
From Theorems 12 and 16, we obtain a NEXPTIME upper bound
for deciding FO-rewritability and datalog-rewritability of ontology-
mediated queries based on DLs and (B)AQs. The corresponding
lower bounds are proved in the full version of this paper using a
reduction from a NEXPTIME-hard tiling problem (in fact, the same
problem as in the lower bound for query containment).
Theorem 17 It is in NEXPTIME to decide FO-rewritability and
datalog-rewritability of queries in (SHIU,AQ∪BAQ). Both prob-
lems are NEXPTIME-hard for (ALC,AQ) and (ALC, BAQ).
Modulo a minor difference in the treatment of instances that are not
consistent (see Footnote 3), it follows from a result in [36] that FO-
rewritability is undecidable for (ALCF,AQ). In the full version of
this paper, we show how to bridge the difference and how to modify
the proof so that the result also applies to datalog-rewritability.
Theorem 18 FO-rewritability and datalog-rewritability are unde-
cidable for (ALCF,AQ) and (ALCF,BAQ).
6.
CONCLUSION
Another query language frequently used in OBDA with descrip-
tion logics is conjunctive queries. The results in this paper imply
that there is a dichotomy between PTIME and CONP for (ALC,CQ)
if and only if the Feder-Vardi conjecture holds. We leave it open
whether there is a natural characterization of (ALC,CQ) in terms
of disjunctive datalog.
We mention two natural lines of future research. First, it would
be interesting to understand the data complexity and query con-
tainment problem for (GF,UCQ) and (GNFO,UCQ). In particu-
lar, we would like to know whether Theorems 8 and 10 extend to
(GF,UCQ) and (GNFO,UCQ). As explained in Section 4, resolving
this question for Theorem 8 is equivalent to clarifying the compu-
tational status of GMSNP and MMSNP2.
Another interesting topic for future work is to analyze
FO-rewritability and datalog-rewritability of ontology-mediated
queries based on UCQs (instead of AQs) as a decision problem.
It follows from our results that this is equivalent to deciding FO-
deﬁnability and datalog-deﬁnability of MMSNP formulas (or even
GMSNP formulas).
Acknowledgements. We thank Benoit Larose and Liber Barto for
discussions on datalog-deﬁnability of CSPs, and Florent Madeleine
and Manuel Bodirsky for discussions on MMSNP.

Meghyn Bienvenu was supported by the ANR project PAGODA
(ANR-12-JS02-007-01). Balder ten Cate was supported by NSF
Grants IIS-0905276 and IIS-1217869. Carsten Lutz was supported
by the DFG SFB/TR 8 “Spatial Cognition”.
7.
