Maximal Closed Set and Half-Space Separations
in Finite Closure Systems∗
Florian Seiﬀarth1, Tam´as Horv´ath1,2,3, and Stefan Wrobel1,2,3

1Dept. of Computer Science, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany
2Fraunhofer IAIS, Schloß Birlinghoven, Sankt Augustin, Germany
3Fraunhofer Center for Machine Learning, Schloß Birlinghoven, Sankt Augustin, Germany
Abstract
Several concept learning problems can be regarded as special cases of
half-space separation in abstract closure systems over ﬁnite ground sets.
For the typical scenario that the closure system is implicitly given via a
closure operator, we show that the half-space separation problem is NP-
complete. As a ﬁrst approach to overcome this negative result, we relax
the problem to maximal closed set separation, give a generic greedy al-
gorithm solving this problem with a linear number of closure operator
calls, and show that this bound is sharp.
For a second direction, we
consider Kakutani closure systems and prove that they are algorithmi-
cally characterized by the greedy algorithm.
As a ﬁrst special case of
the general problem setting, we consider Kakutani closure systems over
graphs and give a suﬃcient condition for this kind of closure systems in
terms of forbidden graph minors. For a second special case, we then fo-
cus on closure systems over ﬁnite lattices, give an improved adaptation
of the generic greedy algorithm, and present an application concerning
subsumption lattices.
Keywords: machine learning, closure systems, half-space separation
1
Introduction
We consider the following computational problem: Given a closure system [10]
C ⊆2E over some ﬁnite ground set E and A, B ⊆E, ﬁnd A′, B′ ∈C such that
A ⊆A′, B ⊆B′, and A′ and B′ form a partitioning of E, if such A′ and B′
exist; otherwise return the answer “No”. This problem can be regarded as an
adaptation of that of binary half-space separation in Rd, a well-studied problem
in machine learning (see, e.g., [31, 4, 40, 16]). Indeed, this latter problem can be
viewed as follows: The underlying closure system is given by the family C′ of all
∗An early version of this paper appeared in [32].
1
arXiv:2001.04417v3  [cs.AI]  13 Jun 2022

(topologically) closed convex subsets of Rd and for all disjoint sets X, Y ⊆Rd,
the task is to return two half-spaces X′, Y ′ ∈C′ such that X ⊆X′, Y ⊆Y ′,
and X′ is the complement of Y ′ \ H, where H is the boundary hyperplane of
Y ′, if the convex hulls of X and Y are disjoint. Otherwise, the algorithm is
required to return the answer “No”. The correctness of this generic method for
Rd follows from the result of [21] that any two disjoint convex sets in Rd are
always separable by a hyperplane. In order to reﬂect this problem adaptation,
the output closed sets A′, B′ of the generic problem above are referred to as
(abstract) half-spaces and the input sets A, B as half-space separable sets in C.
While half-space separability in Rd is a well-understood problem, its adapta-
tion to closure systems over ﬁnite ground sets has received less attention in the
machine learning literature. This is somewhat surprising, as several problems
including, for example, node classiﬁcation in networks (see, e.g., [36]) or cer-
tain consistent hypothesis ﬁnding problems in inductive logic programming (see,
e.g., [28]) can be viewed as special cases of half-space separation in ﬁnite clo-
sure systems. In contrast, several results concerning diﬀerent formal properties
of abstract half-spaces over ﬁnite domains have been published in theoretical
computer science and geometry (see, e.g., [8, 14, 24, 38]). Using the fact that
the family of convex sets in Rd forms a closure system, the underlying idea of
adapting hyperplane separation in Rd to arbitrary ﬁnite ground sets E is to
consider some semantically meaningful closure system C over E. A subset H of
E is considered as an (abstract) half-space, if H and its complement both belong
to C. In this ﬁeld of research there is a distinguished focus on characterization
results of Kakutani closure systems (see, e.g., [8, 39]). This kind of closure sys-
tems satisfy the property that any two subsets of the ground set are half-space
separable in the closure system if and only if their closures are disjoint.
Utilizing the results of other research ﬁelds [8, 14, 24, 38], in this work
we ﬁrst study the algorithmic aspects of half-space separation in ﬁnite closure
systems. In the problem setting we assume that the closure systems are given
implicitly by a closure operator. This assumption is justiﬁed by the fact that
their cardinality can be exponential in that of the underlying ground set. In
addition, we assume that no additional domain speciﬁc information is available
for the algorithm. We show that half-space separability in this generic problem
setting is NP-hard.
We note that this negative result is independent of the
time complexity of the closure operator, i.e., it holds also for the case that the
closure of a set can be calculated in unit time. If the closure operator can be
computed in time polynomial in the size of the input set, the underlying half-
space separation problem lies in NP (i.e., half-space separation is NP-complete).
To overcome this negative complexity result, we ﬁrst relax the problem to
maximal closed set1 separation. That is, we are interested in ﬁnding two closed
sets that are disjoint, contain the two input sets, and none of them has a proper
superset in the closure system possessing these properties.
For this relaxed
problem we give a simple greedy algorithm and show that it is eﬃcient and
1Throughout this work we consistently use the nomenclature “closed sets” by noting that
“convex” and “closed” are synonyms by the standard terminology of this ﬁeld.
2

optimal in terms of the number of closure operator calls. As a second approach,
we then focus on Kakutani closure systems. We ﬁrst show that in order to decide
whether a closure system is Kakutani, any algorithm that has access to the
closure system only via the corresponding closure operator requires exponentially
many closure operator calls in the worst-case. Still, Kakutani closure systems
remain highly interesting because there are various closure systems that are
known to be Kakutani cf. [8]. We also prove that the above mentioned simple
greedy algorithm provides an algorithmic characterization of Kakutani closure
systems. That is, for all A, B ⊆E, the output A′ ⊇A and B′ ⊇B of the
greedy algorithm is a partitioning of E if and only if the closures of A and B
are disjoint.
In the second part of the paper we consider domain speciﬁc adaptations of
maximal closed set and half-space separations to closure systems over graphs
and lattices. In particular, we show that closure systems over graphs induced
by shortest paths [15] are Kakutani if they do not contain the bipartite clique
K2,3 as a minor. The converse of this claim is, however, not true. This result,
together with the characterization result of [7] immediately implies that closure
systems over outerplanar graphs and hence, over trees are Kakutani. Regarding
lattices, we present an adaptation of the above mentioned greedy algorithm to
closure systems over lattices. It computes a disjoint maximal ideal and ﬁlter that
contain the two input sets. This adaptation has several algorithmic advantages
over the generic greedy algorithm. In particular, it utilizes the facts that in
each iteration, the current ideal and ﬁlter can be represented by its supremum
and inﬁmum, respectively. Furthermore, their disjointness can be decided by
comparing these two elements. For the special case that the elements of the
lattice are subsets of some ﬁnite ground set, the number of closure operator
calls is only quadratic in the cardinality of the domain, implying an exponential
speed-up over the generic greedy algorithm mentioned above. In addition to
these results, we also show that the adaptation of the greedy algorithm preserves
the characterization property, i.e., it provides an algorithmic characterization
of Kakutani closure systems over ﬁnite lattices.
This characterization result
is somewhat orthogonal to the characterization given in terms of distributivity
(see, e.g., [24]).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we discuss related
work. In Section 3 we collect the necessary notions and ﬁx the notation. In
Section 4 we deﬁne the problem settings, discuss potential applications, and
study the complexity issues of half-space and maximal closed set separation in
abstract closure systems over ﬁnite domains. Section 5 is devoted to Kakutani
closure systems. Section 6 is concerned with closure systems over graphs and
lattices. Finally, in Section 7 we formulate some problems for further research.
2
Related Work
Similarly to hyperplane separations in Euclidean spaces, diﬀerent kinds of sep-
arations can be considered for (ﬁnite) closure systems using the deﬁnition of
3

closed sets. In [38] the most familiar separation axioms (S1) - (S4) are pre-
sented. They can be described as follows: (S1) all singletons are closed, (S2)
two distinct elements can be separated by half-spaces, (S3) every closed set is
an intersection of half-spaces and (S4) two disjoint closed sets can be separated
by half-spaces.2 In this work we concentrate on closure systems satisfying the
most restrictive axiom S4 inspired by the Euclidean space counterpart result
of [21] that convex sets can be separated by hyperplanes. This is motivated
by the fact that basic machine learning algorithms such as the Perceptron [31]
and Support Vector Machines [40] heavily rely on the separation property in
Rd. Hence we want to analyze Kakutani closure systems, i.e., closure systems
fulﬁlling the property (S4) which guarantees complete separation.
Some of the earliest characterization of Kakutani closure systems was ob-
tained by Ellis [14] generalizing results of Stone [35] that distributive lattices
and Tukey [37] that real linear spaces fulﬁll (S4). While Bair [2] restricts to
straight line spaces and Bryant and Webster [6] give a very basic overview the
work of Chepoi [8] analyzes the (S4) property of closure systems espacially for
n-ary convexities and interval convexities (e.g. graphs with geodesic convexity
and lattices) in great details. One of his main results we are using troughout our
paper is the characterization of Kakutani closure systems via the Pasch Axiom.
While the above papers concentrate on the theoretical aspects of half-space
separation we are also interested in the algorithmic properties and complexity
results. Concerning the complexity of the general half-space separation problem
as far as we know we are the ﬁrst showing that it is NP-hard using the complexity
result of [1] for the special case of graphs.
Moreover, we relax to the more
general case of maximal disjoint closed sets which allows for further applications,
see [33].
Other recent work focusing on the applications of half-spaces separations in
computer science espacially in the domain of graphs are cluster recovery with
queries [5], vertex classiﬁcation in batch [11, 32, 34], active learning [36] and
genome rearrangement [9].
3
Preliminaries
In this section we collect the necessary notions and ﬁx the notation for set and
closure systems. For details on closure systems and separation axioms (see, e.g.,
[8, 10, 39]).
Closure Systems
For a set E, 2E denotes the power set of E. A set system
over a ground set E is a pair (E, C) with C ⊆2E; (E, C) is a closure system if it
fulﬁlls the following two properties:
i) E ∈C and
2Note that if (S1) holds true then the implications (S4) =⇒(S3) =⇒(S2) follow. In
general we do not assume that singletons are closed but e.g. in case of geodesic closures in
graphs and closures in lattices (S1) holds true. An example where (S1) does not hold is the
closure system induced by the galois closure operator used in closed itemset mining.
4

ii) X ∩Y ∈C for all X, Y ∈C.
Throughout this paper by closure systems we always mean closure systems over
ﬁnite ground sets (i.e., |E| < ∞). It is a well-known fact (see, e.g., [10]) that any
closure system can be deﬁned by a closure operator, i.e., function ρ : 2E →2E
satisfying the following properties for all X, Y ⊆E:
i) X ⊆ρ(X),
(extensivity)
ii) ρ(X) ⊆ρ(Y ) whenever X ⊆Y ,
(monotonicity)
iii) ρ(ρ(X)) = ρ(X).
(idempotency)
For a closure system (E, C), the corresponding closure operator ρ is deﬁned
by
ρ(X) =
\
C∈C:X⊆C
C
for all X ⊆E. Conversely, for a closure operator ρ over E the corresponding
closure system, denoted (E, Cρ), is deﬁned by the family of its ﬁxed points, i.e.,
Cρ = {X ⊆E : ρ(X) = X}.
Depending on the context we sometimes omit the underlying closure operator
from the notation and denote the closure system simply by (E, C). The elements
of Cρ of a closure system (E, Cρ) will be referred to as closed or convex sets.
This latter terminology is justiﬁed by the fact that closed sets generalize several
properties of convex hulls in Rd. As a straightforward example, for any ﬁnite
set E ⊂Rd, the set system (E, Cα) with α : 2E →2E deﬁned by
α : X 7→conv(X) ∩E
(1)
for all X ⊆E is a closure system, where conv(X) denotes the convex hull of X
in Rd. We will refer to this type of closure systems as α-closure systems.
Separation in Closure Systems
We now turn to the generalization of
binary separation in Rd by hyperplanes to binary separation in abstract closure
systems.3
In the context of machine learning, one of the most relevant and
natural questions concerning closure systems (E, C) is whether two subsets of
E are separable in C, or not. To state the formal problem deﬁnition, we follow
the generalization of half-spaces in Euclidean spaces to closure systems from [8].
More precisely, let (E, C) be a closure system. Then H ⊆E is called a half-space
in C if both H and its complement, denoted Hc, are closed (i.e., H, Hc ∈C).
Note that Hc is also a half-space by deﬁnition. Two sets A, B ⊆E are half-space
separable if there is a half-space H ∈C such that A ⊆H and B ⊆Hc; H and
Hc together form a half-space separation of A and B. The following property
will be used many times in what follows:
3For a detailed introduction into this topic (see, e.g. [39]).
5

Proposition 1. Let (E, Cρ) be a closure system, H, Hc ∈C, and A, B ⊆E.
Then H and Hc form a half-space separation of A and B if and only if they
form a half-space separation of ρ(A) and ρ(B).
Proof. The “if” direction is immediate by the extensivity of ρ. The “only-if”
direction follows from the fact that for any S ⊆E and C ∈Cρ with S ⊆C we
have ρ(S) ⊆ρ(C) = C by the monotonicity and idempotency of ρ.
Throughout this paper we will be concerned with half-space separation of
non-empty subsets of the ground set. Proposition 2 below provides a necessary
condition for this problem. Its proof is immediate from the property that C is
closed under intersection.
Proposition 2. Let (E, C) be a closure system and A, B be non-empty subsets
of E that are half-space separable in C. Then ρ(∅) = ∅.
Notice that half-space separability in abstract closure systems does not pre-
serve all natural properties of that in Rd. For example, for any two ﬁnite subsets
of Rd it always holds that they are half-space separable if and only if their convex
hulls4 are disjoint. In contrast, as we show in Section 4 below, this equivalence
does not hold for ﬁnite closure systems in general.
4
Half-Space and Maximal Closed Set Separa-
tion in Closure Systems
In this section we ﬁrst formulate some results concerning the computational
complexity of the following decision problems:
Problem 1 (The Half-Space Separation (HSS) Problem). Given a clo-
sure system (E, Cρ) with |E| < ∞via ρ and non-empty subsets A, B ⊆E, decide
whether A and B are half-space separable in Cρ, or not.
For algebraic reasons we disregard the degenerate case of A = ∅or B =
∅.
Furthermore, similarly to the inﬁnite closure system over Rd deﬁned by
the family of all convex hulls in Rd, we suppose that the (abstract) closure
system is given implicitly. More precisely, we assume that (E, Cρ) is given by
the corresponding closure operator ρ, which returns ρ(X) for any X ⊆E in
unit time. Accordingly, we characterize the complexity of the algorithms by the
number of closure operator calls they require. The assumption that Cρ is given
implicitly (or intensionally) is natural, as |Cρ| can be exponential in |E|.
Clearly, the solution of an instance of the HSS problem is always “No”
whenever ρ(A) ∩ρ(B) ̸= ∅.
However, as shown in the example below, the
converse of the implication is not true, i.e., the disjointness of the closures of A
and B does not imply their half-space separability in C.
4Notice that the function mapping any subset of Rd to its convex hull is a closure operator.
6

u
v
y
w
x
z
Figure 1: Example of a point conﬁguration in R2, where adding z to either of
the closed sets {x, y, w} and {u, v} would violate the disjointness condition.
Example 1. Consider the set E ⊂R2 consisting of the six points in Fig. 1 and
the α-closure system (E, Cα) deﬁned in (1). Though {u, v} and {x, y, w} are
both closed (i.e., belong to Cα) and disjoint, they are not half-space separable in
Cα, as z can be added to neither of the sets without violating the disjointness
property of half-space separation.
This diﬀerence to Rd makes, among others, the more general problem setting
considered in this work computationally diﬃcult, as shown in Thm. 1 below.
The fact that the disjointness of ρ(A) and ρ(B) does not imply half-space sep-
arability of A and B makes the HSS problem computationally intractable. To
prove this negative complexity result, we adopt the deﬁnition of convex vertex
sets of a graph deﬁned by shortest paths [19, 26], also referred to as the geodesic
graph closure. More precisely, for an undirected graph G = (V, E) we consider
the set system (V, Cγ) with
V ′ ∈Cγ ⇐⇒∀u, v ∈V ′, ∀P ∈Su,v : V (P) ⊆V ′
(2)
for all V ′ ⊆V , where Su,v denotes the set of shortest paths connecting u and v in
G and V (P) the set of vertices in P. Notice that (V, Cγ) is a closure system. This
follows directly from the fact that the intersection of any two convex subsets of
V is also convex, by noting that the empty set is also convex by deﬁnition. This
type of closure systems will be referred to as γ-closure systems throughout this
paper. Using the above deﬁnition of graph convexity, we consider the following
problem:
Convex 2-Partitioning Problem: Given an undirected graph G = (V, E),
decide whether there is a proper partitioning of V into two convex sets.
This problem is known to be NP-complete [1].
Notice that the condition
on properness is necessary, as otherwise ∅and V would always form a (triv-
ial) solution. Note also the diﬀerence between the HSS and the Convex 2-
Partitioning problems.
The latter one is concerned with a property of G
(i.e., has no additional input A, B). The concepts and result above imply the
following negative result (see Appendix A for the proof):
Theorem 1. The HSS problem is NP-hard.
7

We will refer to the problem deﬁned in the same way as the HSS problem,
but with the diﬀerence that ρ can be computed in time O (p(|V |))-time for
some polynomial p as the HSSPOLY-problem. Thm. 1 immediately implies
the following negative results:
Corollary 1. The HSSPOLY problem is NP-complete.
The next corollary is concerned with the complexity of computing a closed
set separation of maximum size. (Note that the case of k = |E| in the corollary
below corresponds to the HSS problem.)
Corollary 2. Given a closure system (E, Cρ) via ρ as in the HSS problem,
non-empty subsets A, B ⊆E, and an integer k > 0, it is NP-hard to decide
whether there are disjoint closed sets H1, H2 ∈Cρ with A ⊆H1, B ⊆H2 such
that |H1| + |H2| ≥k.
The negative results above motivate us to relax the HSS problem.
4.1
Maximal Closed Set Separation
One way to overcome the negative results formulated in Thm. 1 and Corollary 2
is to weaken the condition on half-space separability in the HSS problem to the
problem of maximal closed set separation:
Maximal Closed Set Separation (MCSS) Problem: Given a closure sys-
tem (E, Cρ) via ρ as in the HSS problem and non-empty subsets A, B ⊆E,
ﬁnd two disjoint closed sets H1, H2 ∈Cρ with A ⊆H1 and B ⊆H2 such
that there are no disjoint sets H′
1, H′
2 ∈Cρ with H1 ⊆H′
1 and H2 ⊆H′
2,
where at least one of the containments is proper; o/w return “NO” (i.e.,
if such closed sets do not exist).
In this section we present Alg. 1, that solves the MCSS problem and is
optimal w.r.t. the worst-case number of closure operator calls. Alg. 1 takes as
input a closure system (E, Cρ) over some ﬁnite ground set E, where Cρ is given
via the closure operator ρ, and non-empty sets A, B ⊆E. If the closures of A
and B are not disjoint, then it returns “NO” (cf. Lines 1–3). Otherwise, the
algorithm tries to extend one of the largest closed sets H1 ⊇A and H2 ⊇B
found so far consistently by an element e ∈F, where F = E \ (H1 ∪H2) is
the set of potential generators. By consistency we mean that the closure of the
extended set must be disjoint with the other (unextended) one (cf. Lines 8 and
10). Note that each element will be considered at most once for extension (cf.
Line 7). If H1 or H2 could be extended, then F will correspondingly be updated
(cf. Lines 9 and 11), by noting that e will be removed from F even in the case it
does not result in an extension (cf. Line 7). The algorithm repeatedly iterates
the above steps until F becomes empty; at this stage it returns H1 and H2 as
a solution. In the theorem below concerning some basic properties of Alg. 1,
gen(C, X) denotes the cardinality of a smallest relativ generator set G ⊆E such
that ρ(X ∪G) = C, for C ∈C and X ⊆C.
8

Algorithm 1: Maximal Closed Set Separation (MCSS)
Input: ﬁnite closure system (E, Cρ) given by ρ and A, B ⊆E with
A, B ̸= ∅
Output: maximal disjoint closed sets H1, H2 ∈Cρ with A ⊆H1 and
B ⊆H2 if ρ(A) ∩ρ(B) = ∅; “No” o/w
1 H1 ←ρ(A), H2 ←ρ(B)
2 if H1 ∩H2 ̸= ∅then
3
return “No”
4 end
5 F ←E \ (H1 ∪H2)
6 while F ̸= ∅do
7
choose e ∈F and remove it from F
8
if ρ(H1 ∪{e}) ∩H2 = ∅then
9
H1 ←ρ(H1 ∪{e}), F ←F \ H1
10
else if
ρ(H2 ∪{e}) ∩H1 = ∅then
11
H2 ←ρ(H2 ∪{e}), F ←F \ H2
12
end
13 end
14 return H1, H2
Theorem 2. Alg. 1 is correct. Furthermore, for the number N of its closure
operator calls it holds that N = 2 if ρ(A) ∩ρ(B) ̸= ∅; o/w
gen(E, A ∪B) + 2 ≤N ≤2|E| −2 .
(3)
Proof. The correctness is straightforward by noting that the maximality of the
output closed sets H1 and H2 follows from the monotonicity of ρ, as all elements
e considered by the algorithm and not added earlier to one of the closed sets (cf.
Lines 9 and 11) can be added later neither to H1 nor to H2 without violating
the disjointness.
Regarding the second part of the claim, it is trivial for the case that ρ(A) ∩
ρ(B) ̸= ∅, so assume ρ(A) ∩ρ(B) = ∅. For the lower bound in (3), note that
N ≥2 + gen(H1, A) + gen(H2, B) + m ,
(4)
where m = |E \ (H1 ∪H2)|. We claim that
gen(H1, A) + gen(H2, B) ≥gen(ρ(H1 ∪H2), A ∪B) .
(5)
Indeed, by deﬁnition there are G1, G2 ⊆E with |G1| = gen(H1, A) and |G2| =
gen(H2, B) such that H1 = ρ(A ∪G1) and H2 = ρ(B ∪G2). Moreover,
ρ(H1 ∪H2) = ρ(ρ(A ∪G1) ∪ρ(B ∪G2)) ⊆ρ(A ∪B ∪G1 ∪G2)
implying |G1 ∪G2| ≥gen(ρ(H1 ∪H2), A ∪B), from which (5) follows by |G1| +
|G2| ≥|G1 ∪G2|. We now show that
gen(ρ(H1 ∪H2), A ∪B) + m ≥gen(E, A ∪B).
(6)
9

By deﬁnition, there exists G ⊆E with |G| = gen(ρ(H1 ∪H2), A ∪B) such that
ρ(H1 ∪H2) = ρ(A ∪B ∪G). But then, for X = E \ (H1 ∪H2) we have
E = H1 ∪H2 ∪X
⊆ρ(H1 ∪H2) ∪X
= ρ(A ∪B ∪G) ∪X
⊆ρ(A ∪B ∪G ∪X)
from which we have (6) by |X| = m. The lower bound in (3) then follows from
(4)–(6).
Regarding the upper bound in (3), the algorithm calls initially the closure
operator twice (cf. Line 1) and then at most twice per iteration (cf. Lines 9 and
11), giving
N ≤2 · |E \ (ρ(A) ∪ρ(B))| + 2 .
The claim then follows from the case that A and B are closed singletons.
We stress that Alg. 1 has access to (E, Cρ) only via ρ, i.e., it does not utilize
any domain speciﬁc properties. The following example shows that, under this
assumption, the number of closure operator calls depends on the order of A and
B as well as on that of the elements selected in Line 7.
Example 2. Let (E, Cρ) be the closure system with E = {1, 2, . . . , n} for some
integer n > 1 and with the corresponding closure operator deﬁned by ρ : X 7→
{x ∈E : min X ≤x ≤max X} for all X ⊆E. Consider ﬁrst the case that
A = {2}, B = {1}, and n has been chosen in Line 7 for the ﬁrst iteration. For
this case, the algorithm terminates after the ﬁrst iteration returning the closed
half-spaces H1 = {2, . . . , n} and H2 = {1}, and calling the closure operator
together three times.
Now consider the case that A = {1}, B = {2}, and the elements in Line 7
are processed in the order 3, 4, . . . , n. One can easily check that the algorithm
returns the same two half-spaces after n −2 iterations. In each iteration it calls
the closure operator twice, giving together the worst-case upper bound 2n −2
claimed in Thm. 2.
Though the example above may suggest that Alg. 1 is not optimal, the worst-
case upper bound stated in Thm. 2 is in fact the best possible, regardless of the
order of the elements in Line 7 for the general case stated above. Furthermore,
the example indicates that using domain speciﬁc structure might help to reduce
the number of closure operator calls drastically.
This is veriﬁed in case of
lattices in Section 6.2. To show optimality in the general case, we ﬁrst prove
the following lemma.
Lemma 1. All algorithms solving the MCSS problem require at least 2|E| −2
closure operator calls in the worst-case.
Proof. Suppose for contradiction that there is an algorithm A solving the MCSS -
problem with strictly less than 2|E| −2 closure operator calls for all problem
10

instances. Consider the closure system (E, Cρ) with E = {e1, . . . , en} for some
n > 2 and with the closure operator ρ deﬁned by
ρ(X) =
(
X
if X ∈{∅, {e1}, {e2}}
E
o/w .
By condition, A returns the only solution {e1} and {e2} of the MCSS problem
for the input {e1} and {e2} with at most 2|E|−3 closure operator calls. We claim
that A needs to calculate the closure for both input sets. Indeed, suppose the
closure of one of them, say {e1}, has not been computed. Then A is incorrect,
as it would return the same output for the closure system above and for (E, Cρ \
{e1}). Thus, A can calculate the closure for at most 2|E| −5 further subsets of
E. This implies that the closure has not been considered by A for at least one of
the sets {e1, e3}, . . . , {e1, en}, {e2, e3}, . . . , {e2, en}, say for {e1, e3}. But then A
returns the same output for (E, Cρ) and for the closure system (E, Cρ ∪{e1, e3}),
contradicting its correctness.
Theorem 3. Alg. 1 is optimal w.r.t. the worst-case number of closure operator
calls.
Proof. It is immediate from the upper bound in Thm. 2 and Lemma 1.
As a second relaxation besides maximal disjoint closed sets, in Section 5 we
consider Kakutani closure systems, a special kind of closure systems, for which
a half-space separation always exists if the closures of the input sets are disjoint.
We will show that for this type of closure systems, Alg. 1 provides an algorithmic
characterization and solves the HSS problem correctly and eﬃciently.
5
Kakutani Closure Systems
A natural way to overcome the negative result stated in Thm. 1 is to consider
closure systems in which any two disjoint closed sets are half-space separable.
More precisely, for a closure operator ρ over a ground set E, the corresponding
closure system (E, Cρ) is Kakutani5 if it fulﬁlls the S4 separation axiom deﬁned
as follows: For all A, B ⊆E,
A and B are half-space separable in (E, Cρ) ⇐⇒ρ(A) ∩ρ(B) = ∅.
For a detailed reference on closure systems satisfying the S4 separation property,
the reader is referred to [8].
By Proposition 1, any half-space separation of
A, B in Cρ is a half-space separation of ρ(A) and ρ(B) in Cρ.
Clearly, the
HSSPOLY problem can be decided in polynomial time for Kakutani closure
systems: For any A, B ⊆E just calculate ρ(A) and ρ(B) and check whether
they are disjoint, or not. Furthermore, if A and B are half-space separable,
(E, Cρ) is Kakutani, and ρ can be computed in time polynomial in n, then
Alg. 1 returns a half-space separation of A, B in polynomial time.
5A similar property was considered by the Japanese mathematician Shizou Kakutani for
Euclidean spaces cf. [21]
11

Example 3. The closure system used in Example 1 is not Kakutani. For an
example of Kakutani closure systems, consider an arbitrary non-empty ﬁnite
subset E ⊂R2 of a circle and deﬁne the set system C ⊆2E as follows: For all
E′ ⊆E, E′ ∈C if and only if there exits a closed half-plane H ⊆R2 satisfying
E′ = H ∩E. One can easily check that (E, C) is a Kakutani closure system.
In the theorem below we show that Alg. 1, besides solving the MCSS prob-
lem, also provides an algorithmic characterization of Kakutani closure systems.
Theorem 4. Let (E, Cρ) be a closure system with corresponding closure operator
ρ. Then (E, Cρ) is Kakutani if and only if for all non-empty A, B ⊆E with
ρ(A) ∩ρ(B) = ∅, the output of Alg. 1 is a partitioning of E.
Proof. The suﬃciency is immediate by Thm. 2 and the deﬁnition of Kakutani
closure systems. For the necessity, let (E, Cρ) be a Kakutani closure system.
It suﬃces to show that for all e ∈F selected in Line 7 of Alg. 1, e is always
added to one of H1 or H2; the claim then follows by Thm. 2 for this direction.
Suppose for contradiction that there exists an e ∈F selected in Line 7 that can
be used to extend neither of the closed sets H1, H2. Since H1 and H2 are disjoint
closed sets and (E, Cρ) is Kakutani, there are H′
1, H′
2 ∈Cρ such that H1 ⊆H′
1,
H2 ⊆H′
2, and H′
2 = (H′
1)c. Hence, exactly one of H′
1 and H′
2 contains e, say H′
1.
By the choice of e, ρ(H1 ∪{e})∩H2 ̸= ∅. Since ρ is monotone, ρ(H1 ∪{e}) ⊆H′
1
and hence H′
1 and H′
2 are not disjoint; a contradiction.
The characterization result formulated in Thm. 4 cannot, however, be used
to decide in time polynomial in |E|, whether an intensionally given closure
system (E, Cρ) is Kakutani, or not. More precisely, in Thm. 5 below we have a
negative result for the following decision problem:
Kakutani Problem: Given a closure system (E, Cρ), where Cρ is given by the
corresponding closure operator ρ, decide whether (E, Cρ) is Kakutani, or
not.
Theorem 5. Any algorithm solving the Kakutani problem above requires Ω
 2|E|/2
closure operator calls.
Proof. We can assume w.l.o.g.
that ∅∈Cρ, as otherwise there are no two
separable subsets of E. For any even number6 n ∈N, consider a set E with
|E| = n and the set system
Cρ = {X ⊆E : |X| ≤n/2} ∪{E} .
We claim that (E, Cρ) is a Kakutani closure system. Since ∅, E ∈Cρ and |C1 ∩
C2| ≤n/2 for any C1, C2 ∈Cρ, (E, Cρ) is closed under intersection and hence,
it is a closure system. To see that it is Kakutani, notice that all X ∈Cρ with
|X| = n/2 are half-spaces; all other closed sets Y ∈Cρ with 0 < |Y | < n/2
6A similar proof applies to odd numbers. For simplicity, we omit the discussion of that
case.
12

are not half-spaces. Thus, for any non-empty A, B ⊆E with ρ(A) ∩ρ(B) = ∅,
ρ(A) can be extended to a half-space H1 ∈Cρ such that H1 ∩ρ(B) = ∅. By
construction, H1 and its complement Hc
1 form a half-space separation of A and
B. Hence, (E, Cρ) is Kakutani. Note also that for any C ∈Cρ with |C| = n/2,
(E, Cρ \ {C}) remains a closure system, but becomes non-Kakutani.
We are ready to prove the lower bound claimed. Suppose for contradiction
that there exists an algorithm A that decides the Kakutani problem with strictly
less than
  n
n/2

= Ω
 2n/2
closure operator calls. Then, for (E, Cρ) above, there
exists a half-space C ∈Cρ with |C| = n/2 such that A has not called ρ for C.
But then A returns the same answer for the Kakutani and non-Kakutani closure
systems (E, Cρ) and (E, Cρ \ {C}), contradicting its correctness.
The exponential lower bound in Theorem 5 above holds for arbitrary (ﬁnite)
closure systems. Fortunately, there is a broad class of closure systems that are
known to be Kakutani. In particular, as a generic application ﬁeld of Kakutani
closure systems, in Section 6.1 we focus on Kakutani closure systems over graphs
and in Section 6.2.3 on those over ﬁnite lattices.
6
Domain Speciﬁc Results
This section is concerned with the special cases of closure systems over graphs
and lattices.
6.1
Closure Systems over Graphs
As a ﬁrst application of Theorem 4, in this section we consider Kakutani closure
systems over graphs. The following result provides a characterization of Kaku-
tani γ-closure systems over graphs in terms of the Pasch axiom [8]. We note
that the theorem below holds for closure systems deﬁned by any set of paths in
the underlying graph.
Theorem 6. [8] For any ﬁnite graph G = (V, E), the corresponding γ-closure
system (V, Cγ) is Kakutani if and only if γ fulﬁlls the Pasch axiom, i.e.,
x ∈γ({u, v}) ∧y ∈γ({u, w}) =⇒γ({x, w}) ∩γ({y, v}) ̸= ∅
(7)
for all u, v, w, x, y ∈V .
Note that the theorem above can be turned into a na¨ıve algorithm that de-
cides the Kakutani problem for γ-closure systems over graphs in O
 n8
time
and in O
 n2
space by checking the condition in (7) for all quintuples of ver-
tices; the complexity of computing γ for any set of vertices is O
 n3
[13]. The
following more sophisticated algorithm7 reduces this time complexity to O
 n5
time, using, however, O
 n4
space. Compute ﬁrst γ({u, v}) for all u, v ∈V and
store them in a matrix M. The time and space complexity of this step is O
 n5
7Personal communication with Victor Chepoi.
13

and O
 n3
, respectively. Using M, for each pair of closed sets we can decide
in O (n) time whether or not they are disjoint and store this information in a
binary matrix B. This can be done in O
 n5
time and
 n4) space. Iterating
over all quintuples Q = (u, v, w, x, y) ∈V 5, we can check in constant time from
M and B whether Q fulﬁlls (7), implying the time and space complexity claimed
above.
Using the characterization result above, in the theorem below we give a
suﬃcient condition in terms of forbidden minors for the Kakutani property for
γ-closure systems.
More precisely, as the main contribution of this section,
we show that a closure system of a graph is Kakutani whenever the underlying
graph does not contain K2,3 as a minor. This result may be of some independent
interest as well. To state the theorem, we recall that K2,3 denotes the complete
bipartite graph (V1, V2, E) with |V1| = 2 and |V2| = 3. Furthermore, a graph H
is a minor of a graph G if H can be obtained from G by a sequence of vertex
and edge deletions and edge contractions (see, e.g., [12]).
Theorem 7. For any ﬁnite graph G = (V, E), the γ-closure system (V, Cγ) is
Kakutani if G does not contain K2,3 as a minor.
Proof. We prove the claim by contraposition. Let G = (V, E) be a graph such
that (V, Cγ) is not Kakutani. Then, by Theorem 6, γ does not fulﬁll the Pasch
axiom, i.e., there are u, v, w ∈V , x ∈γ({u, v}), and y ∈γ({u, w}) such that
γ({v, y}) ∩γ({x, w}) = ∅.
(8)
We claim that u, v, w, x, y are pairwise diﬀerent. We show this property only
for x and w; the proofs for the other vertex pairs are similar.
Suppose for
contradiction that x = w. Then, by (8), x (resp. y) lies on a shortest path
between u and v (resp. u and x). But then there is a shortest path between v and
y containing x (i.e., x ∈γ({v, y})), contradicting the disjointedness condition
in (8).
We are ready to show that (8) implies that G contains K2,3 = (V1, V2, E) as
a minor with V1 = {x, y} and V2 = {u, v, w}. By (8), there are shortest paths
Puv between u, v with x ∈Puv and Puw between u, w with y ∈Puw. Let u′ be
the common vertex of Pux and Puy that has the maximum distance to u. It
must be the case that u′ ̸= x, u′ ̸= y, and x (resp. y) lies on the subpath Pu′v
of Puv (resp. Pu′w of Puw), as otherwise the disjointness condition in (8) does
not hold. Moreover, as γ({v, y}) ∩γ({x, w}) = ∅by (8), the subpaths Pxv of
Pu′v and Pyw of Pu′w must be vertex disjoint. Hence, G contains the subgraph
depicted in Fig. 2a (it suﬃces to consider only one shortest path between u′
and u). Regarding the shortest paths between v and y, note that none of them
can contain u′, as otherwise x ∈γ({v, y}) and thus, γ({v, y}) ∩γ({x, w}) would
be non-empty. Furthermore, by (8), they cannot contain x and w. In a similar
way, none of the shortest paths between x and w contains u′, y, v. Combining
these properties with the one implied by (8) that all shortest paths between v
and y are pairwise vertex disjoint with all shortest path between w and x, we
have that G contains the subgraph given in Fig. 2b. The minor K2,3 claimed in
14

w
u
v
x
u′
y
(a)
w
v
x
u
u′
y
(b)
w
u
v
x
y
(c)
Figure 2: Graph minor of Non-Kakutani graphs
the theorem is then obtained from this subgraph by edge contraction (cf. Fig.
2c).
Remark 1. We note that the converse of Theorem 7 does not hold, implying
that K2,3 as a forbidden minor does not characterize the Kakutani property for
closure systems over graphs. Indeed, for all complete graphs Kn = (V, E), the
corresponding closure system (V, 2V ) is Kakutani. The claim then follows by
noting that K2,3 is a minor of Kn for all n ≥5.
In Corollary 3 below we formulate an immediate implication of Theorem 7.
We recall that a graph is outerplanar if it can be embedded in the plane such
that there are no two edges crossing in an interior point and all vertices lie on
the outer face.
Corollary 3. For any outerplanar graph G = (V, E), the corresponding γ-
closure system (V, Cγ) is Kakutani.
Proof. It follows directly from Theorem 7 together with the characterization
result of outerplanar graphs by [7].
Note that the corollary above applies also to trees, as they are (special)
outerplanar graphs. Though the result for trees is well-known, it is typically
derived directly from the Pasch axiom. In contrast, we obtain it as an immediate
consequence of Theorem 7.
6.2
Closure Systems over Lattices
Our second application ﬁeld is concerned with closure systems over lattices. The
focus lies, as before, on the HSS and MCSS problems for the special case that
the underlying ground set is some ﬁnite lattice and the closure operator for a
subset S of the ground set is deﬁned by the set of all elements lying between
the inﬁmum and supremum of S.
For this kind of closure systems we give
Alg. 2 which improves Alg. 1 for lattice structures. Assuming that the closures
of the input sets A and B to be separated are disjoint, Alg. 2 extends them
into a disjoint maximal ideal I and a maximal ﬁlter F such that A ⊆I and
15

⊤L
⊥L
⊤L
⊥L
⊤L
⊥L
Figure 3: The example shows three diﬀerent separations of the lattice elements
⊤L and ⊥L the ﬁrst two ones are half-space separations while the third one is a
maximal disjoint closed set separation. Note that the lattice is not distributive,
i.e., our greedy algorithm does not guarantee to ﬁnd a half-space separation.
B ⊆F or vice versa (see Fig. 6.2 for an example of diﬀerent separations of
a ﬁnite lattice). This specialized version has some important advantages over
Alg. 1. In particular, for certain problem classes it reduces the number of closure
operator calls logarithmically. This is the situation e.g. in frequent closed itemset
mining [29] or formal concept analysis [17]. Furthermore, the disjointness of
the closures of any two sets can be decided by comparing their suprema and
inﬁma. A further important property of the greedy algorithm specialized to
lattices is that it regards the input sets A and B above symmetrically. This is
a crucial diﬀerence e.g. to inductive logic programming [25, 28, 30], where one
is typically interested in ﬁnding the smallest ideal of the subsumption lattices
that contains the set of positive examples. If this smallest ideal, with supremum
deﬁned by the least general generalization of the set of positive examples, is not
disjoint with the set of negative examples, then the separation problem has no
solution. This case, however, does not exclude the situation that there is a ﬁlter
containing the set of positive examples that is disjoint with a ideal containing
the set of negative examples.
In addition to these properties, we also show
that our modiﬁed greedy algorithm comprises an algorithmic characterization
of Kakutani closure systems over lattices.
This characterization provides an
alternative to the algebraic one formulated in terms of distributivity (see, e.g.,
[24]).
6.2.1
Notions and Notation
For basic notions from lattice theory, the reader is referred to [10, 18]. Let (S; ≤)
be a partially ordered set (or poset) and X ⊆S. The supremum (resp. inﬁmum)
of X, if it exists, is denoted by sup X (resp. inf X). For a ﬁnite lattice (L; ≤),
16

⊥L (resp. ⊤L) denotes inf L (resp. sup L). Unless otherwise stated, throughout
this section by lattices we always mean ﬁnite lattices.
Let (L; ≤) be a lattice. An element x ∈L is an upper (resp. lower) cover
of a ∈L if a ≤x (resp. x ≤a) and for all y ∈L with a ≤y (resp. a ≥y) it
holds that a ≤x ≤y (resp. y ≤x ≤a). The set of upper (resp. lower) covers
of a is denoted by C↑(a) (resp.
C↓(a)).
A lattice L is called distributive if
inf{a, sup{b, c}} = sup{inf{a, b}, inf{a, c}} holds for all a, b, c ∈L. A sublattice
of L is a non-empty subset of L which is a lattice. An ideal I of L is a non-empty
subset of L satisfying (i) sup{a, b} ∈I for all a, b ∈I and (ii) a ∈I whenever
a ∈L, b ∈I, and a ≤b. An ideal I ⊊L is prime if a ∈I or b ∈I whenever
inf{a, b} ∈I. The dual notions of ideals and prime ideals are called ﬁlters and
prime ﬁlters, respectively. One can easily check that all ideals and ﬁlters of L
are sublattices of L. Furthermore, as |L| < ∞by assumption, an ideal I (resp.
ﬁlter F) can be represented by sup I (resp. inf F). The ideal (resp. ﬁlter) of L
with top (resp. bottom) element a is denoted by (a] (resp. [a)). It follows from
the deﬁnitions that the complement of a prime ideal of L is a prime ﬁlter of L
and vice versa.
Closure Systems over Lattices
For ﬁnite lattices (L; ≤), we will consider
the usual closure operator (see, e.g., [38]), i.e., the function λ : 2L →2L deﬁned
by
λ : L′ 7→{x ∈L | inf L′ ≤x ≤sup L′}
(9)
for all L′ ⊆L. The set λ(L′) forms a closed sublattice of L, where a sublattice
S of L is closed if for all a, b ∈S and for all c ∈L, a ≤c ≤b implies c ∈S.
Thus, (L, Cλ) is a closure system formed by the family of closed sublattices of
L together with the empty set. This type of closure systems will be referred
to as λ-closure systems. In Lemmas 2 and 3 below we formulate some basic
properties of ﬁnite lattices and λ-closure systems. Though most of the claims
follow from basic properties of lattices, we provide all proofs in Appendix A for
the reader’s convenience.
Lemma 2. Let (L; ≤) be a ﬁnite lattice and A, B ⊆L. Then the following
statements are equivalent:
(i) inf B ≰sup A,
(ii) [inf B) ∩(sup A] = ∅,
(iii) there exist an ideal I ⊆L and a ﬁlter F ⊆L with I ∩F = ∅such that
A ⊆I ∧B ⊆F.
Lemma 3. Let (L, Cλ) be the λ-closure system over a ﬁnite lattice (L; ≤) and
A, B ⊆L. Then λ(A) ∩λ(B) = ∅if and only if there exist an ideal I ⊆L and
a ﬁlter F ⊆L with I ∩F = ∅such that (A ⊆I ∧B ⊆F) or (B ⊆I ∧A ⊆F).
17

Algorithm 2: Maximal Closed Set Separation in Lattices
Input: lattice (L; ≤) with |L| < ∞given by an upward and a
downward reﬁnement operator returning C↑(a) and C↓(a) for
any a ∈L, and A, B ⊆L
Output: supremum of a maximal ideal I ∈Cλ and inﬁmum of a
maximal ﬁlter F ∈Cλ separating A and B in (L, Cλ) with λ
deﬁned in (9) if λ(A) ∩λ(B) = ∅; “No” o/w
1 if
(sup A ≱inf B) then ⊤I ←sup A, ⊥F ←inf B
2 else if (sup B ≱inf A) then ⊤I ←sup B, ⊥F ←inf A
3 else return “No”
4 while ∃u ∈C↑(⊤I) with u ≱⊥F do ⊤I ←u
5 while ∃l ∈C↓(⊥F ) with l ̸≤⊤I do ⊥F ←l
6 return ⊤I, ⊥F
6.2.2
Maximal Closed Set Separation in Lattices
Applying Thm. 3 to λ-closure systems over a lattice (L; ≤), we have that Alg. 1
requires O (|L|) closure operator calls. If the cardinality of L is exponential
in some parameter n, then the bound above becomes exponential in n. As an
example, in case of formal concept analysis [17], the cardinality of the concept
lattice can be exponential in that of the underlying sets of objects and attributes.
As another example, the lattice formed by the family of closed (item)sets of
a transaction database over n items can also be exponential in n [3]. These
and other examples motivate us to adapt Alg. 1 to lattices in a natural way,
allowing for an upper bound on the number of closure operator calls in terms
of the cardinalities of the upper and lower covers of a lattice and the maximum
chain length in L. As we show below, in case of concept lattices or (frequent)
closed itemset lattices, the exponential bound above reduces to O
 n2
.
The algorithm solving the MCSS-problem for ﬁnite lattices is given in Alg. 2.
In case of lattices we can assume that the input lattice (L; ≤) is given by an
upward C↑and a downward C↓reﬁnement operator returning the sets of upper
resp. lower covers for the elements of L. For any A, B ⊆L, the algorithm ﬁrst
checks whether their closures are disjoint or not; this is decided by comparing
the suprema and inﬁma of A and B (cf. Lines 1–3). If the two closed sets are
disjoint then, by Lemma 3, L has a smallest ideal I and a smallest ﬁlter F such
that I and F are disjoint and either λ(A) ⊆I and λ(B) ⊆F or vice versa.
The algorithm then iteratively tries to extend either I into a larger ideal or F
into a larger ﬁlter in a way that the extension does not violate the disjointness
condition. In the ﬁrst case, the supremum of I is replaced by one of its upper
covers; in the second one the inﬁmum of F by one of its lower covers. Finally,
the algorithm stops when the current ideal and hence, the current ﬁlter becomes
prime or when any further extension makes them non-disjoint.
Alg. 2 has some important advantageous properties over Alg. 1.
In par-
ticular, while Alg. 1 considers all uncovered elements for the extension of the
18

current closed sets, Alg. 2 restricts the choice of the next generator element to
C↑(sup I) ∪C↓(inf F), i.e., to a subset of the set of elements uncovered so far.
Although in the worst case this change does not improve the number of closure
operator calls stated in Thm. 3 for Alg. 1, below we show that a logarithmic
bound holds for certain closure systems over lattices. Another advantageous
property of Alg. 2 is that it utilizes that the disjointness of two closed sets can
be decided by comparing two elements only, i.e., the supremum of the current
ideal with the inﬁmum of the current ﬁlter. Furthermore, the closure operator
can be calculated in an easy way by taking advantage of the fact that any closed
sublattice of L can be represented by its top and bottom elements. We have the
following result for Alg. 2:
Theorem 8. For any λ-closure system over a ﬁnite lattice (L; ≤), Alg. 2 solves
the MCSS problem correctly.
Proof. Let (L, Cλ) be the λ-closure system over a lattice (L; ≤) and A, B ⊆L.
The correctness for the case that λ(A)∩λ(B) ̸= ∅(or equivalently, A and B are
not separable in Cλ) is immediate from Lemmas 2 and 3. Applying Lemma 3 to
the case that λ(A)∩λ(B) = ∅, there exist disjoint ideal I and ﬁlter F in Cλ such
that A ⊆I and B ⊆F or vice versa. For symmetry, we can assume without
loss of generality that A ⊆I and B ⊆F. Then, by Lemma 2, the condition
in Line 1 holds and thus, the algorithm terminates in Line 6 for this case.
Consider the sequences u1, . . . , up ∈L and l1, . . . , lq ∈L selected in this order
in Lines 4 and 5, respectively. By construction, A ⊆(u0] ⊊(u1] ⊊. . . ⊊(up]
and B ⊆[l0) ⊊[l1) ⊊. . . ⊊[lq), where u0 = sup A and l0 = inf B. Furthermore,
as up ≱lq (cf. Line 5), the ideal (up] and ﬁlter [lq) corresponding to the output
⊤I = up and ⊥F = lq are disjoint by Lemma 2. Thus, they form a closed set
separation of A and B in Cλ.
We now show that (up] and [lq) form a maximal closed set separation of A
and B in Cλ. Suppose for contradiction that there exist I′, F ′ ∈Cλ with I′∩F ′ =
∅, (up] ⊆I′, and [lq) ⊆F ′ such that at least one of the two containments is
proper. We present the proof for (up] ⊊I′ only; the case of [lq) ⊊F ′ is similar.
Since (up] ⊊I′, there exists an u ∈C↑(up) with up ⪇u ≤sup I′. But then,
by Line 4 we have u ≥lq, which contradicts I′ ∩F ′ = ∅by Lemma 3, as
sup I′ ≥u ≥lq ≥inf F ′.
One can easily check that the number of evaluations of the relation “≤” in
Lines 4 and 5 is O (HLCL), where HL is the maximum chain length in L and
CL = max
x∈L max{| C↑(x)|, | C↓(x)|}. Proposition 3 below utilizes this property for
the special case that the underlying lattice is a family of subsets of some ﬁnite
ground set.
Proposition 3. Let (L, Cλ) be a λ-closure system over a lattice (L; ⊆) with
L ⊆2E for some ground set E of cardinality n.
Then Alg. 2 solves the
MCSS problem for the λ-closure system over (L; ⊆) with O
 n2
evaluations
of the subset relation.
19

Proof. It follows directly from the remark above by HL = O (n) and HC =
O (n).
Since L ⊆2E for some ground set E with |E| = n, |L| can be exponential in
n. As an application of Proposition 3 to concept lattices and closed (frequent)
itemsets, we have that maximal closed separations can be found in time polyno-
mial in the size of the underlying ground sets for these types of closure systems.
In Appendix B we present an illustrative example of an application of Alg. 2 to
learning in ﬁrst-order logic.
6.2.3
Kakutani Closure Systems over Lattices
In this section we consider Kakutani λ-closure systems over ﬁnite lattices. This
kind of closure systems have a well-known algebraic characterization in terms of
distributivity (see, e.g., [24, 38]). As an orthogonal result, in Thm. 9 below we
show that Alg. 2 provides an algorithmic characterization of Kakutani λ-closure
systems over lattices.
Theorem 9. Let (L, Cλ) be the λ-closure system over a ﬁnite lattice (L; ≤
). Then (L, Cλ) is Kakutani if and only if for all non-empty A, B ⊆L with
λ(A) ∩λ(B) = ∅, the ideal (⊤I] and ﬁlter [⊥F ) deﬁned by the output ⊤I and
⊥F of Alg. 2 form a partitioning of L.
Proof. The suﬃciency is immediate by Thm. 8. For the necessity, let (L, Cλ) be
a Kakutani closure system and A, B ⊆L with λ(A) ∩λ(B) = ∅. Let u1, . . . , up
and l1, . . . , lq be the maximal sequences considered in the proof of Thm. 8 for the
case of λ(A)∩λ(B) = ∅. For their last elements we have that (up], [lq) ∈Cλ and
(up] ∩[lq) = ∅. Since Cλ is Kakutani, there is a proper partitioning H, Hc ∈Cλ
of L such that (up] ⊆H and [lq) ⊆Hc. Thus, ⊥L ∈H and ⊤L ∈Hc, implying
that H is a prime ideal and Hc is its complement prime ﬁlter. Suppose for
contradiction that one of the two containments above, say the ﬁrst one, is proper
(i.e., (up] ⊊H). But then, using similar arguments as in the proof of Thm. 8,
there exists an element u ∈C↑(up) such that u will be selected after uq in Line 4.
This contradicts that uq is the last element selected in Line 4.
Corollary 4. Let (L, Cλ) be the λ-closure system over a ﬁnite lattice (L; ≤).
Then (L, Cλ) is distributive if and only if for all non-empty A, B ⊆L with
λ(A) ∩λ(B) = ∅, the ideal (⊤I] and ﬁlter [⊥F ) deﬁned by the output ⊤I and
⊥F of Alg. 2 form a partitioning of L.
Proof. Immediate from Thm. 9 and the characterization of λ-closure systems
over ﬁnite lattices in terms of distributivity [24, 38].
20

7
Concluding Remarks
In [33] we have “enriched” the data by deﬁning an abstract “distance” function
between elements and sets, using the notion of monotone linkage functions [27].8
Motivated by the concept of support vector machines [40], in [33] we study the
problem of half-space and maximal closed set separation with maximum margin
in this kind of abstract closure systems.
The results of Section 6.2.3 show that Alg. 1 can be improved in terms of
the number of closure operator calls by utilizing structural properties of lat-
tices. It would be interesting to study Alg. 1 for other domains, in particular,
for special classes of graphs and relational structures from this point of view.
Throughout this paper we considered binary separation problems only. Clearly,
they can naturally be extended to multi-class separation problems (i.e., ﬁnding
a k-partitioning of the ground set or k maximal closed sets that are pairwise
disjoint, for some k ≥2 integer). While the generalization of our results concern-
ing maximal closed set separation is straightforward, it is less obvious for the
k-partitioning problem, which could also be called k-Kakutani (i.e., 2-Kakutani
is the special case of the half-space separation problem). We note that for the
special case of graphs, this problem has already been studied by [1].
In the general problem settings considered in this work we assumed that
the closure operator is given by an oracle, which returns the closure of a set
extensionally. In case of closure systems over lattices, closed sets (e.g., ideals
and ﬁlters) can, however, be represented intensionally (i.e., by their suprema
and inﬁma). As another example, for closure systems over trees we have that
any half-space has a succinct intensional representation e.g. by a single node
together with the edge connecting it to the complement half-space. These and
other examples motivate the study of structural properties of closure systems
allowing for some compact intensional representation of abstract half-spaces
and closed sets.
A further problem is to study algorithms solving the HSS and MCSS prob-
lems for closure systems, for which an upper bound on the VC-dimension is
known in advance. The relevance of the VC-dimension in this context is that
for any closed set C ∈Cρ of a closure system (E, Cρ), there exists a set G ⊆E
with |G| ≤d such that ρ(G) = C, where d is the VC-dimension of Cρ (see,
e.g., [20]). It is an open question whether the lower bound on the number of
closure operator calls can be characterized in terms of the VC-dimension of the
underlying closure system. Finally, regarding Kakutani closure systems, it is an
interesting research direction to study the relaxed notion of almost Kakutani
closure systems, i.e., in which the combined size of the output closed sets are
close to the cardinality of the ground set.
8Monotone linkage functions provide an abstract measure of connectedness between ob-
jects. They are used, among others, in the context of clustering in convex geometries [22, 23].
21
