FINDING CONSENSUS BAYESIAN NETWORK STRUCTURES
JOSE M. PE˜NA
ADIT, DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER AND INFORMATION SCIENCE
LINK¨OPING UNIVERSITY, SE-58183 LINK¨OPING, SWEDEN

Abstract. Suppose that multiple experts (or learning algorithms) provide us with alterna-
tive Bayesian network (BN) structures over a domain, and that we are interested in combining
them into a single consensus BN structure. Speciﬁcally, we are interested in that the con-
sensus BN structure only represents independences all the given BN structures agree upon
and that it has as few parameters associated as possible. In this paper, we prove that there
may exist several non-equivalent consensus BN structures and that ﬁnding one of them is
NP-hard. Thus, we decide to resort to heuristics to ﬁnd an approximated consensus BN
structure. In this paper, we consider the heuristic proposed in (Matzkevich and Abramson,
1992, 1993a,b). This heuristic builds upon two algorithms, called Methods A and B, for eﬃ-
ciently deriving the minimal directed independence map of a BN structure relative to a given
node ordering. Methods A and B are claimed to be correct although no proof is provided (a
proof is just sketched). In this paper, we show that Methods A and B are not correct and
propose a correction of them.
1. Introduction
Bayesian networks (BNs) are a popular graphical formalism for representing probability
distributions. A BN consists of structure and parameters. The structure, a directed and
acyclic graph (DAG), induces a set of independencies that the represented probability distri-
bution satisﬁes. The parameters specify the conditional probability distribution of each node
given its parents in the structure. The BN represents the probability distribution that results
from the product of these conditional probability distributions. Typically, a single expert (or
learning algorithm) is consulted to construct a BN of the domain at hand. Therefore, there is
a risk that the so-constructed BN is not as accurate as it could be if, for instance, the expert
has a bias or overlooks certain details. One way to minimize this risk consists in obtaining
multiple BNs of the domain from multiple experts and, then, combining them into a single
consensus BN. This approach has received signiﬁcant attention in the literature (Matzkevich
and Abramson, 1992, 1993a,b; Maynard-Reid II and Chajewska, 2001; Nielsen and Parsons,
2007; Pennock and Wellman, 1999; Richardson and Domingos, 2003; del Sagrado and Moral,
2003). The most relevant of these references is probably (Pennock and Wellman, 1999), be-
cause it shows that even if the experts agree on the BN structure, no method for combining
the experts’ BNs produces a consensus BN that respects some reasonable assumptions and
whose structure is the agreed BN structure. Unfortunately, this problem is often overlooked.
To avoid it, we propose to combine the experts’ BNs in two steps. First, ﬁnding the consensus
BN structure and, then, ﬁnding the consensus parameters for the consensus BN structure.
This paper focuses only on the ﬁrst step. Speciﬁcally, we assume that multiple experts pro-
vide us with alternative DAG models of a domain, and we are interested in combining them
into a single consensus DAG. Speciﬁcally, we are interested in that the consensus DAG only
represents independences all the given DAGs agree upon and as many of them as possible. In
other words, the consensus DAG is the DAG that represents the most independences among
all the minimal directed independence (MDI) maps of the intersection of the independence
Date: October 26, 2018.
1
arXiv:1101.1715v4  [stat.ML]  11 Jul 2011

2
models induced by the given DAGs.1 To our knowledge, whether the consensus DAG can or
cannot be found eﬃciently is still an open problem. See (Matzkevich and Abramson, 1992,
1993a,b) for more information. In this paper, we redeﬁne the consensus DAG as the DAG
that has the fewest parameters associated among all the MDI maps of the intersection of
the independence models induced by the given DAGs. This deﬁnition is in line with that of
ﬁnding a DAG to represent a probability distribution p. The desired DAG is typically deﬁned
as the MDI map of p that has the fewest parameters associated rather than as the MDI map
of p that represents the most independences. See, for instance, (Chickering et al., 2004). The
number of parameters associated with a DAG is a measure of the complexity of the DAG,
since it is the number of parameters required to specify all the probability distributions that
can be represented by the DAG.
In this paper, we prove that there may exist several non-equivalent consensus DAGs and
that ﬁnding one of them is NP-hard. Thus, we decide to resort to heuristics to ﬁnd an approx-
imated consensus DAG. In this paper, we consider the following heuristic due to Matzkevich
and Abramson (1992, 1993a,b). First, let α denote any ordering of the nodes in the given
DAGs, which we denote here as G1, . . . , Gm. Then, ﬁnd the MDI map Gi
α of each Gi rela-
tive to α. Finally, let the approximated consensus DAG be the DAG whose arcs are exactly
the union of the arcs in G1
α, . . . , Gm
α . It should be mentioned that our formulation of the
heuristic diﬀers from that in (Matzkevich and Abramson, 1992, 1993a,b) in the following two
points. First, the heuristic was introduced under the original deﬁnition of consensus DAG.
We justify later that the heuristic also makes sense under our deﬁnition of consensus DAG.
Second, α was originally required to be consistent with one of the given DAGs. We remove
this requirement. All in all, a key step in the heuristic is ﬁnding the MDI map Gi
α of each
Gi. Since this task is not trivial, Matzkevich and Abramson (1993b) present two algorithms,
called Methods A and B, for eﬃciently deriving Gi
α from Gi. Methods A and B are claimed
to be correct although no proof is provided (a proof is just sketched). In this paper, we show
that Methods A and B are not correct and propose a correction of them.
As said, we are not the ﬁrst to study the problem of ﬁnding the consensus DAG. In addition
to the works discussed above by Matzkevich and Abramson (1992, 1993a,b) and Pennock
and Wellman (1999), some other works devoted to this problem are (Maynard-Reid II and
Chajewska, 2001; Nielsen and Parsons, 2007; Richardson and Domingos, 2003; del Sagrado
and Moral, 2003). We elaborate below on the diﬀerences between these works and ours.
Maynard-Reid II and Chajewska (2001) propose to adapt existing score-based algorithms for
learning DAGs from data to the case where the learning data is replaced by the BNs provided
by some experts. Their approach suﬀers the problem pointed out by Pennock and Wellman
(1999), because it consists essentially in learning a consensus DAG from a combination of the
given BNs. A somehow related approach is proposed by Richardson and Domingos (2003).
Speciﬁcally, they propose a Bayesian approach to learning DAGs from data, where the prior
probability distribution over DAGs is constructed from the DAGs provided by some experts.
Since their approach requires data and does not combine the given DAGs into a single DAG,
it addresses a problem rather diﬀerent from the one in this paper. Moreover, the construction
of the prior probability distribution over DAGs ignores the fact that some given DAGs may
be diﬀerent but equivalent. That is, unlike in the present work, a DAG is not interpreted as
inducing an independence model. A work that is relatively close to ours is that by del Sagrado
and Moral (2003). Speciﬁcally, they show how to construct a MDI map of the intersection and
union of the independence models induced by the DAGs provided by some experts. However,
1It is worth mentioning that the term consensus DAG has a diﬀerent meaning in computational biology
(Jackson et al., 2005). There, the consensus DAG of a given set of DAGs G1, . . . , Gm is deﬁned as the DAG
that contains the most of the arcs in G1, . . . , Gm. Therefore, the diﬃculty lies in keeping as many arcs as
possible without creating cycles. Note that, unlike in the present work, a DAG is not interpreted as inducing
an independence model in (Jackson et al., 2005).

3
there are three main diﬀerences between their work and ours. First, unlike us, they do not
assume that the given DAGs are deﬁned over the same set of nodes. Second, unlike us, they
assume that there exists a node ordering that is consistent with all the given DAGs. Third,
their goal is to ﬁnd a MDI map whereas ours is to ﬁnd the MDI map that has the fewest
parameters associated among all the MDI maps, i.e. the consensus DAG. Finally, Nielsen
and Parsons (2007) develop a general framework to construct the consensus DAG gradually.
Their framework is general in the sense that it is not tailored to any particular deﬁnition of
consensus DAG. Instead, it relies upon a score to be deﬁned by the user and that each expert
will use to score diﬀerent extensions to the current partial consensus DAG. The individual
scores are then combined to choose the extension to perform. Unfortunately, we do not see
how this framework could be applied to our deﬁnition of consensus DAG. Speciﬁcally, we do
not see how each expert could score the extensions independently of the other experts, what
the score would look like, or how the scores would be combined.
It is worth recalling that this paper deals with the combination of probability distributions
expressed as BNs. Those readers interested in the combination of probability distributions
expressed in non-graphical numerical forms are referred to, for instance, (Genest and Zidek,
1986). Note also that we are interested in the combination before any data is observed. Those
readers interested in the combination after some data has been observed and each expert
has updated her beliefs accordingly are referred to, for instance, (Ng and Abramson, 1994).
Finally, note also that we aim at combining the given DAGs into a DAG, the consensus DAG.
Those readers interested in ﬁnding not a DAG but graphical features (e.g. arcs or paths) all
or a signiﬁcant number of experts agree upon may want to consult (Friedman and Koller,
2003; Hartemink et al., 2002; Pe˜na et al., 2004), since these works deal with a similar problem.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We start by reviewing some preliminary
concepts in Section 2. We analyze the complexity of ﬁnding the consensus DAG in Section
3. We discuss the heuristic for ﬁnding an approximated consensus DAG in more detail in
Section 4. We introduce Methods A and B in Section 5 and show that they are not correct.
We correct them in Section 6. We analyze the complexity of the corrected Methods A and B
in Section 7 and show that they are more eﬃcient than any other approach we can think of
to solve the same problem. We close with some discussion in Section 8.
2. Preliminaries
In this section, we review some concepts used in this paper. All the DAGs, probability
distributions and independence models in this paper are deﬁned over V, unless otherwise
stated. If A →B is in a DAG G, then we say that A and B are adjacent in G. Moreover,
we say that A is a parent of B and B a child of A in G. We denote the parents of B in G
by PaG(B). A node is called a sink node in G if it has no children in G. A route between
two nodes A and B in G is a sequence of nodes starting with A and ending with B such
that every two consecutive nodes in the sequence are adjacent in G. Note that the nodes in
a route are not necessarily distinct. The length of a route is the number of (not necessarily
distinct) arcs in the route. We treat all the nodes in G as routes of length zero. A route
between A and B is called descending from A to B if all the arcs in the route are directed
towards B. If there is a descending route from A to B, then B is called a descendant of A.
Note that A is a descendant of itself, since we allow routes of length zero. Given a subset
X ⊆V, a node A ∈X is called maximal in G if A is not descendant of any node in X \ {A}
in G. Given a route ρ between A and B in G and a route ρ′ between B and C in G, ρ ∪ρ′
denotes the route between A and C in G resulting from appending ρ′ to ρ.
The number of parameters associated with a DAG G is P
B∈V[Q
A∈PaG(B) rA](rB−1), where
rA and rB are the numbers of states of the random variables corresponding to the node A
and B. An arc A →B in G is said to be covered if PaG(A) = PaG(B) \ {A}. By covering
an arc A →B in G we mean adding to G the smallest set of arcs so that A →B becomes

4
covered. We say that a node C is a collider in a route in a DAG if there exist two nodes A
and B such that A →C ←B is a subroute of the route. Note that A and B may coincide.
Let X, Y and Z denote three disjoint subsets of V. A route in a DAG is said to be Z-active
when (i) every collider node in the route is in Z, and (ii) every non-collider node in the route
is outside Z. When there is no route in a DAG G between a node in X and a node in Y that
is Z-active, we say that X is separated from Y given Z in G and denote it as X⊥GY|Z. We
denote by X̸⊥GY|Z that X⊥GY|Z does not hold. This deﬁnition of separation is equivalent
to other more common deﬁnitions (Studen´y, 1998, Section 5.1).
Let X, Y, Z and W denote four disjoint subsets of V.
Let us abbreviate X ∪Y as
XY. An independence model M is a set of statements of the form X ⊥MY|Z, meaning
that X is independent of Y given Z. Given a subset U ⊆V, we denote by [M]U all the
statements in M such that X, Y, Z ⊆U. Given two independence models M and N, we
denote by M ⊆N that if X ⊥MY|Z then X ⊥NY|Z. We say that M is a graphoid if
it satisﬁes the following properties: symmetry X ⊥MY|Z ⇒Y ⊥MX|Z, decomposition
X ⊥MYW|Z ⇒X ⊥MY|Z, weak union X ⊥MYW|Z ⇒X ⊥MY|ZW, contraction
X⊥MY|ZW∧X⊥MW|Z ⇒X⊥MYW|Z, and intersection X⊥MY|ZW∧X⊥MW|ZY ⇒
X ⊥MYW|Z. The independence model induced by a probability distribution p, denoted as
I(p), is the set of probabilistic independences in p. The independence model induced by a
DAG G, denoted as I(G), is the set of separation statements X ⊥GY|Z. It is known that
I(G) is a graphoid (Studen´y and Bouckaert, 1998, Lemma 3.1). Moreover, I(G) satisﬁes the
composition property X ⊥GY|Z ∧X ⊥GW|Z ⇒X ⊥GYW|Z (Chickering and Meek, 2002,
Proposition 1). Two DAGs G and H are called equivalent if I(G) = I(H).
A DAG G is a directed independence map of an independence model M if I(G) ⊆M.
Moreover, G is a minimal directed independence (MDI) map of M if removing any arc from
G makes it cease to be a directed independence map of M. We say that G and an ordering
of its nodes are consistent when, for every arc A →B in G, A precedes B in the node
ordering. We say that a DAG Gα is a MDI map of an independence model M relative to a
node ordering α if Gα is a MDI map of M and Gα is consistent with α. If M is a graphoid,
then Gα is unique (Pearl, 1988, Theorems 4 and 9). Speciﬁcally, for each node A, PaGα(A) is
the smallest subset X of the predecessors of A in α, Preα(A), such that A⊥MPreα(A)\X|X.
3. Finding a Consensus DAG is NP-Hard
Recall that we have deﬁned the consensus DAG of a given set of DAGs G1, . . . , Gm as the
DAG that has the fewest parameters associated among all the MDI maps of ∩m
i=1I(Gi). A
sensible way to start the quest for the consensus DAG is by investigating whether there can
exist several non-equivalent consensus DAGs. The following theorem answers this question.
Theorem 1. There exists a set of DAGs that has two non-equivalent consensus DAGs.
Proof. Consider the following two DAGs over four random variables with the same number
of states each:
I
←
J
↓
K
→
L
I
→
J
↓
K
←
L
Any of the following two non-equivalent DAGs is the consensus DAG of the two DAGs
above:
I
→
J
↓
↘
↑
K
←
L
I
←
J
↑
↗
↓
K
→
L
□

5
A natural follow-up question to investigate is whether a consensus DAG can be found eﬃ-
ciently. Unfortunately, ﬁnding a consensus DAG is NP-hard, as we prove below. Speciﬁcally,
we prove that the following decision problem is NP-hard:
CONSENSUS
• INSTANCE: A set of DAGs G1, . . . , Gm over V, and a positive integer d.
• QUESTION: Does there exist a DAG G over V such that I(G) ⊆∩m
i=1I(Gi) and the
number of parameters associated with G is not greater than d ?
Proving that CONSENSUS is NP-hard implies that ﬁnding the consensus DAG is also
NP-hard, because if there existed an eﬃcient algorithm for ﬁnding the consensus DAG, then
we could use it to solve CONSENSUS eﬃciently. Our proof makes use of the following two
decision problems:
FEEDBACK ARC SET
• INSTANCE: A directed graph G = (V, A) and a positive integer k.
• QUESTION: Does there exist a subset B ⊂A such that |B| ≤k and B has at least
one arc from every directed cycle in G ?
LEARN
• INSTANCE: A probability distribution p over V, and a positive integer d.
• QUESTION: Does there exist a DAG G over V such that I(G) ⊆I(p) and the number
of parameters associated with G is not greater than d ?
FEEDBACK ARC SET is NP-complete (Garey and Johnson, 1979). FEEDBACK ARC
SET remains NP-complete for directed graphs in which the total degree of each vertex is
at most three (Gavril, 1977). This degree-bounded FEEDBACK ARC SET problem is used
in (Chickering et al., 2004) to prove that LEARN is NP-hard. In their proof, Chickering
et al. (2004) use the following polynomial reduction of any instance of the degree-bounded
FEEDBACK ARC SET into an instance of LEARN:
• Let the instance of the degree-bounded FEEDBACK ARC SET consist of the directed
graph F = (VF, AF) and the positive integer k.
• Let L denote a DAG whose nodes and arcs are determined from F as follows. For
every arc V F
i
→V F
j
in AF, create the following nodes and arcs in L:
Aij (9)
Dij (9)
↓
↓
V F
i (9)
→
Bij (2)
Hij (2)
Eij (2)
←
Gij (9)
↓
↙
↘
↓
Cij (3)
Fij (2)
→
V F
j (9)
The number in parenthesis besides each node is the number of states of the corre-
sponding random variable. Let HL denote all the nodes Hij in L, and let VL denote
the rest of the nodes in L.
• Specify a (join) probability distribution p(HL, VL) such that I(p(HL, VL)) = I(L).
• Let the instance of LEARN consist of the (marginal) probability distribution p(VL)
and the positive integer d, where d is computed from F and k as shown in (Chickering
et al., 2004, Equation 2).
We now describe how the instance of LEARN resulting from the reduction above can be
further reduced into an instance of CONSENSUS in polynomial time:
• Let C1 denote the DAG over VL that has all and only the arcs in L whose both
endpoints are in VL.
• Let C2 denote the DAG over VL that only has the arcs Bij →Cij ←Fij for all i and
j.

6
• Let C3 denote the DAG over VL that only has the arcs Cij →Fij ←Eij for all i and
j.
• Let the instance of CONSENSUS consist of the DAGs C1, C2 and C3, and the positive
integer d.
Theorem 2. CONSENSUS is NP-hard.
Proof. We start by proving that there is a polynomial reduction of any instance F of the
degree-bounded FEEDBACK ARC SET into an instance C of CONSENSUS. First, reduce
F into an instance L of LEARN as shown in (Chickering et al., 2004) and, then, reduce L
into C as shown above.
We now prove that there is a solution to F iﬀthere is a solution to C. Theorems 8 and
9 in (Chickering et al., 2004) prove that there is a solution to F iﬀthere is a solution to L.
Therefore, it only remains to prove that there is a solution to L iﬀthere is a solution to C.
Let L and p(HL, VL) denote the DAG and the probability distribution constructed in the
reduction of F into L. Recall that I(p(HL, VL)) = I(L). Moreover:
• Let L1 denote the DAG over (HL, VL) that has all and only the arcs in L whose both
endpoints are in VL.
• Let L2 denote the DAG over (HL, VL) that only has the arcs Bij →Cij ←Hij →Fij
for all i and j.
• Let L3 denote the DAG over (HL, VL) that only has the arcs Cij ←Hij →Fij ←Eij
for all i and j.
Note that any separation statement that holds in L also holds in L1, L2 and L3. Then,
I(p(HL, VL)) = I(L) ⊆∩3
i=1I(Li) and, thus, I(p(VL)) ⊆[∩3
i=1I(Li)]VL = ∩3
i=1[I(Li)]VL.
Let C1, C2 and C3 denote the DAGs constructed in the reduction of L into C. Note that
[I(Li)]VL = I(Ci) for all i. Then, I(p(VL)) ⊆∩3
i=1I(Ci) and, thus, if there is a solution to L
then there is a solution to C. We now prove the opposite. The proof is essentially the same
as that of (Chickering et al., 2004, Theorem 9). Let us deﬁne the (Vi, Vj) edge component
of a DAG G over VL as the subgraph of G that has all and only the arcs in G whose both
endpoints are in {Vi, Aij, Bij, Cij, Dij, Eij, Fij, Gij, Vj}. Given a solution C to C, we create
another solution C′ to C as follows:
• Initialize C′ to C1.
• For every (Vi, Vj) edge component of C, if there is no directed path in C from Vi to
Vj, then add to C′ the arcs Eij →Cij ←Fij.
• For every (Vi, Vj) edge component of C, if there is a directed path in C from Vi to Vj,
then add to C′ the arcs Bij →Fij ←Cij.
Note that C′ is acyclic because C is acyclic. Moreover, I(C′) ⊆∩3
i=1I(Ci) because I(C′) ⊆
I(Ci) for all i. In order to be able to conclude that C′ is a solution to C, it only remains to
prove that the number of parameters associated with C′ is not greater than d. Speciﬁcally,
we prove below that C′ does not have more parameters associated than C, which has less
than d parameters associated because it is a solution to C.
As seen before, I(C′) ⊆I(C1). Likewise, I(C) ⊆I(C1) because C is a solution to C.
Thus, there exists a sequence S (resp. S′) of covered arc reversals and arc additions that
transforms C1 into C (resp. C′) (Chickering, 2002, Theorem 4). Note that a covered arc
reversal does not modify the number of parameters associated with a DAG, whereas an arc
addition increases it (Chickering, 1995, Theorem 3). Thus, S and S′ monotonically increase
the number of parameters associated with C1 as they transform it. Recall that C1 consists
of a series of edge components of the form

7
Aij (9)
Dij (9)
↓
↓
V F
i (9)
→
Bij (2)
Eij (2)
←
Gij (9)
↓
↓
Cij (3)
Fij (2)
→
V F
j (9)
The number in parenthesis besides each node is the number of states of the corresponding
random variable. Let us study how the sequences S and S′ modify each edge component of
C1. S′ simply adds the arcs Bij →Fij ←Cij or the arcs Eij →Cij ←Fij. Note that adding
the ﬁrst pair of arcs results in an increase of 10 parameters, whereas adding the second pair
of arcs results in an increase of 12 parameters. Unlike S′, S may reverse some arc in the edge
component. If that is the case, then S must cover the arc ﬁrst, which implies an increase of
at least 16 parameters (covering Fij →Vj by adding Eij →Vj implies an increase of exactly
16 parameters, whereas any other arc covering implies a larger increase). Then, S implies
a larger increase in the number of parameters than S′. On the other hand, if S does not
reverse any arc in the edge component, then S simply adds the arcs that are in C but not
in C1. Note that either Cij →Fij or Cij ←Fij is in C, because otherwise Cij ⊥CFij|Z for
some Z ⊂VL which contradicts the fact that C is a solution to C since Cij ̸⊥C2Fij|Z. If
Cij →Fij is in C, then either Bij →Fij or Bij ←Fij is in C because otherwise Bij ⊥CFij|Z
for some Z ⊂VL such that Cij ∈Z, which contradicts the fact that C is a solution to C since
Bij ̸⊥C2Fij|Z. As Bij ←Fij would create a cycle in C, Bij →Fij is in C. Therefore, S adds
the arcs Bij →Fij ←Cij and, by construction of C′, S′ also adds them. Thus, S implies
an increase of at least as many parameters as S′. On the other hand, if Cij ←Fij is in C,
then either Cij →Eij or Cij ←Eij is in C because otherwise Cij ⊥CEij|Z for some Z ⊂VL
such that Fij ∈Z, which contradicts the fact that C is a solution to C since Cij ̸⊥C3Eij|Z.
As Cij →Eij would create a cycle in C, Cij ←Eij is in C. Therefore, S adds the arcs
Eij →Cij ←Fij and, by construction of C′, S′ adds either the arcs Eij →Cij ←Fij or the
arcs Bij →Fij ←Cij. In any case, S implies an increase of at least as many parameters as
S′. Consequently, C′ does not have more parameters associated than C.
Finally, note that I(p(VL)) ⊆I(C′) by (Chickering et al., 2004, Lemma 7). Thus, if there
is a solution to C then there is a solution to L.
□
It is worth noting that our proof above contains two restrictions. First, the number of
DAGs to consensuate is three. Second, the number of states of each random variable in VL is
not arbitrary but prescribed. The ﬁrst restriction is easy to relax: Our proof can be extended
to consensuate more than three DAGs by simply letting Ci be a DAG over VL with no arcs
for all i > 3. However, it is an open question whether CONSENSUS remains NP-hard when
the number of DAGs to consensuate is two and/or the number of states of each random
variable in VL is arbitrary.
The following theorem strentghens the previous one.
Theorem 3. CONSENSUS is NP-complete.
Proof. By Theorem 2, all that remains to prove is that CONSENSUS is in NP, i.e. that we can
verify in polynomial time if a given DAG G is a solution to a given instance of CONSENSUS.
Let α denote any node ordering that is consistent with G. The causal list of G relative
to α is the set of separation statements A ⊥GPreα(A) \ PaG(A)|PaG(A) for all node A. It
is known that I(G) coincides with the closure with respect to the graphoid properties of the
causal list of G relative to α (Pearl, 1988, Corollary 7). Therefore, I(G) ⊆∩m
i=1I(Gi) iﬀ
A ⊥GiPreα(A) \ PaG(A)|PaG(A) for all 1 ≤i ≤m, because ∩m
i=1I(Gi) is a graphoid (del
Sagrado and Moral, 2003, Corollary 1). Let n, a and ai denote, respectively, the number of
nodes in G, the number of arcs in G, and the number of arcs in Gi. Let b = max1≤i≤m ai.

8
Checking a separation statement in Gi takes O(ai) time (Geiger et al., 1990, p. 530). Then,
checking whether I(G) ⊆∩m
i=1I(Gi) takes O(mnb) time. Finally, note that computing the
number of parameters associated with G takes O(a).
□
4. Finding an Approximated Consensus DAG
Since ﬁnding a consensus DAG of some given DAGs is NP-hard, we decide to resort to
heuristics to ﬁnd an approximated consensus DAG. This does not mean that we discard the
existence of fast super-polynomial algorithms. It simply means that we do not pursue that
possibility in this paper. Speciﬁcally, in this paper we consider the following heuristic due to
Matzkevich and Abramson (1992, 1993a,b). First, let α denote any ordering of the nodes in
the given DAGs, which we denote here as G1, . . . , Gm. Then, ﬁnd the MDI map Gi
α of each
Gi relative to α. Finally, let the approximated consensus DAG be the DAG whose arcs are
exactly the union of the arcs in G1
α, . . . , Gm
α . The following theorem justiﬁes taking the union
of the arcs. Speciﬁcally, it proves that the DAG returned by the heuristic is the consensus
DAG if this was required to be consistent with α.
Theorem 4. The DAG H returned by the heuristic above is the DAG that has the fewest
parameters associated among all the MDI maps of ∩m
i=1I(Gi) relative to α.
Proof. We start by proving that H is a MDI map of ∩m
i=1I(Gi). First, we show that I(H) ⊆
∩m
i=1I(Gi).
It suﬃces to note that I(H) ⊆∩m
i=1I(Gi
α) because each Gi
α is a subgraph of
H, and that ∩m
i=1I(Gi
α) ⊆∩m
i=1I(Gi) because I(Gi
α) ⊆I(Gi) for all i.
Now, assume to
the contrary that the DAG H′ resulting from removing an arc A →B from H satis-
ﬁes that I(H′) ⊆∩m
i=1I(Gi).
By construction of H, A →B is in Gi
α for some i, say
i = j.
Note that B ⊥H′Preα(B) \ PaH′(B)|PaH′(B), which implies B ⊥GjPreα(B) \
((∪m
i=1PaGiα(B)) \ {A})|(∪m
i=1PaGiα(B)) \ {A} because PaH′(B) = (∪m
i=1PaGiα(B)) \ {A} and
I(H′) ⊆∩m
i=1I(Gi).
Note also that B ⊥Gj
αPreα(B) \ PaGj
α(B)|PaGj
α(B), which implies
B ⊥GjPreα(B) \ PaGj
α(B)|PaGj
α(B) because I(Gj
α) ⊆I(Gj). Therefore, B ⊥GjPreα(B) \
(PaGj
α(B) \ {A})|PaGj
α(B) \ {A} by intersection. However, this contradicts the fact that Gj
α
is the MDI map of Gj relative to α. Then, H is a MDI map of ∩m
i=1I(Gi) relative to α.
Finally, note that ∩m
i=1I(Gi) is a graphoid (del Sagrado and Moral, 2003, Corollary 1).
Consequently, H is the only MDI map of ∩m
i=1I(Gi) relative to α.
□
A key step in the heuristic above is, of course, choosing a good node ordering α. Unfortu-
nately, the fact that CONSENSUS is NP-hard implies that it is also NP-hard to ﬁnd the best
node ordering α, i.e. the node ordering that makes the heuristic to return the MDI map of
∩m
i=1I(Gi) that has the fewest parameters associated. To see it, note that if there existed an
eﬃcient algorithm for ﬁnding the best node ordering, then Theorem 4 would imply that we
could solve CONSENSUS eﬃciently by running the heuristic with the best node ordering.
In the last sentence, we have implicitly assumed that the heuristic is eﬃcient, which implies
that we have implicitly assumed that we can eﬃciently ﬁnd the MDI map Gi
α of each Gi.
The rest of this paper shows that this assumption is correct.
5. Methods A and B are not Correct
Matzkevich and Abramson (1993b) do not only propose the heuristic discussed in the
previous section, but they also present two algorithms, called Methods A and B, for eﬃciently
deriving the MDI map Gα of a DAG G relative to a node ordering α. The algorithms work
iteratively by covering and reversing an arc in G until the resulting DAG is consistent with
α. It is obvious that such a way of working produces a directed independence map of G.
However, in order to arrive at Gα, the arc to cover and reverse in each iteration must be

9
Construct β(G, α)
/* Given a DAG G and a node ordering α, the algorithm returns a node ordering β that
is consistent with G and as close to α as possible */
1
β = ∅
2
G′ = G
3
Let A denote a sink node in G′
/* 3
Let A denote the rightmost node in α that is a sink node in G′ */
4
Add A as the leftmost node in β
5
Let B denote the right neighbor of A in β
6
If B ̸= ∅and A /∈PaG(B) and A is to the right of B in α then
7
Interchange A and B in β
8
Go to line 5
9
Remove A and all its incoming arcs from G′
10
If G′ ̸= ∅then go to line 3
11
Return β
Method A(G, α)
/* Given a DAG G and a node ordering α, the algorithm returns Gα */
1
β=Construct β(G, α)
2
Let Y denote the leftmost node in β whose left neighbor in β is to its right in α
3
Let Z denote the left neighbor of Y in β
4
If Z is to the right of Y in α then
5
If Z →Y is in G then cover and reverse Z →Y in G
6
Interchange Y and Z in β
7
Go to line 3
8
If β ̸= α then go to line 2
9
Return G
Method B(G, α)
/* Given a DAG G and a node ordering α, the algorithm returns Gα */
1
β=Construct β(G, α)
2
Let Y denote the leftmost node in β whose right neighbor in β is to its left in α
3
Let Z denote the right neighbor of Y in β
4
If Z is to the left of Y in α then
5
If Y →Z is in G then cover and reverse Y →Z in G
6
Interchange Y and Z in β
7
Go to line 3
8
If β ̸= α then go to line 2
9
Return G
Figure 1. Construct β, and Methods A and B. Our correction of Construct
β consists in replacing line 3 with the line in comments under it.
carefully chosen. The pseudocode of Methods A and B can be seen in Figure 1. Method A
starts by calling Construct β to derive a node ordering β that is consistent with G and as

10
Figure 2. A counterexample to the correctness of Methods A and B.
close to α as possible (line 6). By β being as close to α as possible, we mean that the number
of arcs Methods A and B will later cover and reverse is kept at a minimum, because Methods
A and B will use β to choose the arc to cover and reverse in each iteration. In particular,
Method A ﬁnds the leftmost node in β that should be interchanged with its left neighbor
(line 2) and it repeatedly interchanges this node with its left neighbor (lines 3-4 and 6-7).
Each of these interchanges is preceded by covering and reversing the corresponding arc in G
(line 5). Method B is essentially identical to Method A. The only diﬀerences between them
are that the word ”right” is replaced by the word ”left” and vice versa in lines 2-4, and that
the arcs point in opposite directions in line 5.
Methods A and B are claimed to be correct in (Matzkevich and Abramson, 1993b, Theorem
4 and Corollary 2) although no proof is provided (a proof is just sketched). The following
counterexample shows that Methods A and B are actually not correct. Let G be the DAG
in the left-hand side of Figure 2. Let α = (M, I, K, J, L). Then, we can make use of the
characterization introduced in Section 2 to see that Gα is the DAG in the center of Figure 2.
However, Methods A and B return the DAG in the right-hand side of Figure 2. To see it, we
follow the execution of Methods A and B step by step. First, Methods A and B construct β
by calling Construct β, which runs as follows:
(1) Initially, β = ∅and G′ = G.
(2) Select the sink node M in G′. Then, β = (M). Remove M and its incoming arcs from
G′.
(3) Select the sink node L in G′. Then, β = (L, M). No interchange in β is performed
because L ∈PaG(M). Remove L and its incoming arcs from G′.
(4) Select the sink node K in G′. Then, β = (K, L, M). No interchange in β is performed
because K is to the left of L in α. Remove K and its incoming arcs from G′.
(5) Select the sink node J in G′. Then, β = (J, K, L, M). No interchange in β is performed
because J ∈PaG(K).
(6) Select the sink node I in G′.
Then, β = (I, J, K, L, M).
No interchange in β is
performed because I is to the left of J in α.
When Construct β ends, Methods A and B continue as follows:
(7) Initially, β = (I, J, K, L, M).

11
(8) Add the arc I →J and reverse the arc J →K in G. Interchange J and K in β.
Then, β = (I, K, J, L, M).
(9) Add the arc J →M and reverse the arc L →M in G. Interchange L and M in β.
Then, β = (I, K, J, M, L).
(10) Add the arcs I →M and K →M, and reverse the arc J →M in G. Interchange J
and M in β. Then, β = (I, K, M, J, L).
(11) Reverse the arc K →M in G. Interchange K and M in β. Then, β = (I, M, K, J, L).
(12) Reverse the arc I →M in G. Interchange I and M in β. Then, β = (M, I, K, J, L) =
α.
As a matter of fact, one can see as early as in step (8) above that Methods A and B will
fail: One can see that I and M are not separated in the DAG resulting from step (8), which
implies that I and M will not be separated in the DAG returned by Methods A and B,
because covering and reversing arcs never introduces new separation statements. However, I
and M are separated in Gα.
Note that we constructed β by selecting ﬁrst M, then L, then K, then J, and ﬁnally I.
However, we could have selected ﬁrst K, then I, then M, then L, and ﬁnally J, which would
have resulted in β = (J, L, M, I, K). With this β, Methods A and B return Gα. Therefore, it
makes a diﬀerence which sink node is selected in line 3 of Construct β. However, Construct
β overlooks this detail. We propose correcting Construct β by replacing line 3 by ”Let A
denote the rightmost node in α that is a sink node in G′”. Hereinafter, we assume that any
call to Construct β is a call to the corrected version thereof. The rest of this paper is devoted
to prove that Methods A and B now do return Gα.
6. The Corrected Methods A and B are Correct
Before proving that Methods A and B are correct, we introduce some auxiliary lemmas.
Their proof can be found in the appendix. Let us call percolating Y right-to-left in β to
iterating through lines 3-7 in Method A while possible. Let us modify Method A by replacing
line 2 by ”Let Y denote the leftmost node in β that has not been considered before” and by
adding the check Z ̸= ∅to line 4. The pseudocode of the resulting algorithm, which we call
Method A2, can be seen in Figure 3. Method A2 percolates right-to-left in β one by one all
the nodes in the order in which they appear in β.
Lemma 1. Method A(G, α) and Method A2(G, α) return the same DAG.
Lemma 2. Method A2(G, α) and Method B(G, α) return the same DAG.
Let us call percolating Y left-to-right in β to iterating through lines 3-7 in Method B while
possible. Let us modify Method B by replacing line 2 by ”Let Y denote the rightmost node
in α that has not been considered before” and by adding the check Z ̸= ∅to line 4. The
pseudocode of the resulting algorithm, which we call Method B2, can be seen in Figure 3.
Method B2 percolates left-to-right in β one by one all the nodes in the reverse order in which
they appear in α.
Lemma 3. Method B(G, α) and Method B2(G, α) return the same DAG.
We are now ready to prove the main result of this paper.
Theorem 5. Let Gα denote the MDI map of a DAG G relative to a node ordering α. Then,
Method A(G, α) and Method B(G, α) return Gα.
Proof. By Lemmas 1-3, it suﬃces to prove that Method B2(G, α) returns Gα. It is evident
that Method B2 transforms β into α and, thus, that it halts at some point.
Therefore,
Method B2 performs a ﬁnite sequence of n modiﬁcations (arc additions and covered arc
reversals) to G. Let Gi denote the DAG resulting from the ﬁrst i modiﬁcations to G, and
let G0 = G. Speciﬁcally, Method B2 constructs Gi+1 from Gi by either (i) reversing the

12
Method A2(G, α)
/* Given a DAG G and a node ordering α, the algorithm returns Gα */
1
β=Construct β(G, α)
2
Let Y denote the leftmost node in β that has not been considered before
3
Let Z denote the left neighbor of Y in β
4
If Z ̸= ∅and Z is to the right of Y in α then
5
If Z →Y is in G then cover and reverse Z →Y in G
6
Interchange Y and Z in β
7
Go to line 3
8
If β ̸= α then go to line 2
9
Return G
Method B2(G, α)
/* Given a DAG G and a node ordering α, the algorithm returns Gα */
1
β=Construct β(G, α)
2
Let Y denote the rightmost node in α that has not been considered before
3
Let Z denote the right neighbor of Y in β
4
If Z ̸= ∅and Z is to the left of Y in α then
5
If Y →Z is in G then cover and reverse Y →Z in G
6
Interchange Y and Z in β
7
Go to line 3
8
If β ̸= α then go to line 2
9
Return G
Figure 3. Methods A2 and B2.
covered arc Y →Z, or (ii) adding the arc X →Z for some X ∈PaGi(Y ) \ PaGi(Z), or (iii)
adding the arc X →Y for some X ∈PaGi(Z) \ PaGi(Y ). Note that I(Gi+1) ⊆I(Gi) for all
0 ≤i < n and, thus, that I(Gn) ⊆I(G0).
We start by proving that Gi is a DAG that is consistent with β for all 0 ≤i ≤n. Since
this is true for G0 due to line 1, it suﬃces to prove that if Gi is a DAG that is consistent with
β then so is Gi+1 for all 0 ≤i < n. We consider the following four cases.
Case 1: Method B2 constructs Gi+1 from Gi by reversing the covered arc Y →Z. Then,
Gi+1 is a DAG because reversing a covered arc does not create any cycle (Chickering,
1995, Lemma 1). Moreover, note that Y and Z are interchanged in β immediately
after the covered arc reversal. Thus, Gi+1 is consistent with β.
Case 2: Method B2 constructs Gi+1 from Gi by adding the arc X →Z for some
X ∈PaGi(Y ) \ PaGi(Z). Note that X is to the left of Y and Y to the left of Z in β,
because Gi is consistent with β. Then, X is to the left of Z in β and, thus, Gi+1 is a
DAG that is consistent with β.
Case 3: Method B2 constructs Gi+1 from Gi by adding the arc X →Y for some
X ∈PaGi(Z) \ PaGi(Y ). Note that X is to the left of Z in β because Gi is consistent
with β, and Y is the left neighbor of Z in β (recall line 3). Then, X is to the left of
Y in β and, thus, Gi+1 is a DAG that is consistent with β.
Case 4: Note that β may get modiﬁed before Method B2 constructs Gi+1 from Gi.
Speciﬁcally, this happens when Method B2 executes lines 5-6 but there is no arc

13
Figure 4. Diﬀerent cases in the proof of Theorem 5. Only the relevant sub-
graphs of Gi+1 and Gα are depicted. An undirected edge between two nodes
denotes that the nodes are adjacent. A curved edge between two nodes denotes
an S-active route between the two nodes. If the curved edge is directed, then
the route is descending. A grey node denotes a node that is in S.
between Y and Z in Gi. However, the fact that Gi is consistent with β before Y and
Z are interchanged in β and the fact that Y and Z are neighbors in β (recall line 3)
imply that Gi is consistent with β after Y and Z have been interchanged.
Since Method B2 transforms β into α, it follows from the result proven above that Gn is
a DAG that is consistent with α. In order to prove the theorem, i.e. that Gn = Gα, all
that remains to prove is that I(Gα) ⊆I(Gn). To see it, note that Gn = Gα follows from
I(Gα) ⊆I(Gn), I(Gn) ⊆I(G0), the fact that Gn is a DAG that is consistent with α, and the
fact that Gα is the unique MDI map of G0 relative to α. Recall that Gα is guaranteed to be
unique because I(G0) is a graphoid.
The rest of the proof is devoted to prove that I(Gα) ⊆I(Gn).
Speciﬁcally, we prove
that if I(Gα) ⊆I(Gi) then I(Gα) ⊆I(Gi+1) for all 0 ≤i < n.
Note that this implies
that I(Gα) ⊆I(Gn) because I(Gα) ⊆I(G0) by deﬁnition of MDI map. First, we prove it
when Method B2 constructs Gi+1 from Gi by reversing the covered arc Y →Z. That the
arc reversed is covered implies that I(Gi+1) = I(Gi) (Chickering, 1995, Lemma 1). Thus,
I(Gα) ⊆I(Gi+1) because I(Gα) ⊆I(Gi).
Now, we prove that if I(Gα) ⊆I(Gi) then I(Gα) ⊆I(Gi+1) for all 0 ≤i < n when Method
B2 constructs Gi+1 from Gi by adding an arc. Speciﬁcally, we prove that if there is an S-active
route ρAB
i+1 between two nodes A and B in Gi+1, then there is an S-active route between A

14
and B in Gα. We prove this result by induction on the number of occurrences of the added
arc in ρAB
i+1. We assume without loss of generality that the added arc occurs in ρAB
i+1 as few
or fewer times than in any other S-active route between A and B in Gi+1. We call this the
minimality property of ρAB
i+1.2 If the number of occurrences of the added arc in ρAB
i+1 is zero,
then ρAB
i+1 is an S-active route between A and B in Gi too and, thus, there is an S-active
route between A and B in Gα since I(Gα) ⊆I(Gi). Assume as induction hypothesis that
the result holds for up to k occurrences of the added arc in ρAB
i+1. We now prove it for k + 1
occurrences. We consider the following two cases. Each case is illustrated in Figure 4.
Case 1: Method B2 constructs Gi+1 from Gi by adding the arc X →Z for some X ∈
PaGi(Y )\PaGi(Z). Note that X →Z occurs in ρAB
i+1.3 Let ρAB
i+1 = ρAX
i+1∪X →Z∪ρZB
i+1.
Note that X /∈S and ρAX
i+1 is S-active in Gi+1 because, otherwise, ρAB
i+1 would not be
S-active in Gi+1. Then, there is an S-active route ρAX
α
between A and X in Gα by the
induction hypothesis. Moreover, Y ∈S because, otherwise, ρAX
i+1 ∪X →Y →Z ∪ρZB
i+1
would be an S-active route between A and B in Gi+1 that would violate the minimality
property of ρAB
i+1. Note that Y ←Z is in Gα because (i) Y and Z are adjacent in Gα
since I(Gα) ⊆I(Gi), and (ii) Z is to the left of Y in α (recall line 4). Note also that
X →Y is in Gα. To see it, note that X and Y are adjacent in Gα since I(Gα) ⊆I(Gi).
Recall that Method B2 percolates left-to-right in β one by one all the nodes in the
reverse order in which they appear in α. Method B2 is currently percolating Y and,
thus, the nodes to the right of Y in α are to right of Y in β too. If X ←Y were in
Gα then X would be to the right of Y in α and, thus, X would be to the right of Y
in β. However, this would contradict the fact that X is to the left of Y in β, which
follows from the fact that Gi is consistent with β. Thus, X →Y is in Gα. We now
consider two cases.
Case 1.1: Assume that Z /∈S. Then, ρZB
i+1 is S-active in Gi+1 because, otherwise,
ρAB
i+1 would not be S-active in Gi+1. Then, there is an S-active route ρZB
α
between
Z and B in Gα by the induction hypothesis. Then, ρAX
α
∪X →Y ←Z ∪ρZB
α
is
an S-active route between A and B in Gα.
Case 1.2: Assume that Z ∈S. Then, ρZB
i+1 = Z ←W∪ρWB
i+1 .4 Note that W /∈S and
ρWB
i+1 is S-active in Gi+1 because, otherwise, ρAB
i+1 would not be S-active in Gi+1.
Then, there is an S-active route ρWB
α
between W and B in Gα by the induction
hypothesis. Note that W and Z are adjacent in Gα since I(Gα) ⊆I(Gi). This
and the fact proven above that Y ←Z is in Gα imply that Y and W are adjacent
in Gα because, otherwise, Y ̸⊥GiW|U but Y ⊥GαW|U for some U ⊆V such
that Z ∈U, which would contradict that I(Gα) ⊆I(Gi). In fact, Y ←W is in
Gα. To see it, recall that the nodes to the right of Y in α are to right of Y in β
too. If Y →W were in Gα then W would be to the right of Y in α and, thus, W
would be to the right of Y in β too. However, this would contradict the fact that
W is to the left of Y in β, which follows from the fact that W is to the left of Z
in β because Gi is consistent with β, and the fact that Y is the left neighbor of
Z in β (recall line 3). Thus, Y ←W is in Gα. Then, ρAX
α
∪X →Y ←W ∪ρWB
α
is an S-active route between A and B in Gα.
Case 2: Method B2 constructs Gi+1 from Gi by adding the arc X →Y for some X ∈
PaGi(Z)\PaGi(Y ). Note that X →Y occurs in ρAB
i+1.5 Let ρAB
i+1 = ρAX
i+1∪X →Y ∪ρY B
i+1.
Note that X /∈S and ρAX
i+1 is S-active in Gi+1 because, otherwise, ρAB
i+1 would not be
2It is not diﬃcult to show that the number of occurrences of the added arc in ρAB
i+1 is then at most two
(see Case 2.1 for some intuition). However, the proof of the theorem is simpler if we ignore this fact.
3Note that maybe A = X and/or B = Z.
4Note that maybe W = B. Note also that W ̸= X because, otherwise, ρAX
i+1 ∪X →Y ←X ∪ρW B
i+1 would
be an S-active route between A and B in Gi+1 that would violate the minimality property of ρAB
i+1.
5Note that maybe A = X and/or B = Y .

15
S-active in Gi+1. Then, there is an S-active route ρAX
α
between A and X in Gα by the
induction hypothesis. Note that Y ←Z is in Gα because (i) Y and Z are adjacent in
Gα since I(Gα) ⊆I(Gi), and (ii) Z is to the left of Y in α (recall line 4). Note also
that X and Z are adjacent in Gα since I(Gα) ⊆I(Gi). This and the fact that Y ←Z
is in Gα imply that X and Y are adjacent in Gα because, otherwise, X ̸⊥GiY |U
but X ⊥GαY |U for some U ⊆V such that Z ∈U, which would contradict that
I(Gα) ⊆I(Gi). In fact, X →Y is in Gα. To see it, recall that Method B2 percolates
left-to-right in β one by one all the nodes in the reverse order in which they appear in
α. Method B2 is currently percolating Y and, thus, the nodes to the right of Y in α
are to right of Y in β too. If X ←Y were in Gα then X would be to the right of Y in
α and, thus, X would be to the right of Y in β too. However, this would contradict
the fact that X is to the left of Y in β, which follows from the fact that X is to the
left of Z in β because Gi is consistent with β, and the fact that Y is the left neighbor
of Z in β (recall line 3). Thus, X →Y is in Gα. We now consider three cases.
Case 2.1: Assume that Y ∈S and ρY B
i+1 = Y ←X∪ρXB
i+1. Note that ρXB
i+1 is S-active
in Gi+1 because, otherwise, ρAB
i+1 would not be S-active in Gi+1. Then, there is an
S-active route ρXB
α
between X and B in Gα by the induction hypothesis. Then,
ρAX
α
∪X →Y ←X ∪ρXB
α
is an S-active route between A and B in Gα.
Case 2.2: Assume that Y ∈S and ρY B
i+1 = Y ←W ∪ρWB
i+1 .6 Note that W /∈S and
ρWB
i+1 is S-active in Gi+1 because, otherwise, ρAB
i+1 would not be S-active in Gi+1.
Then, there is an S-active route ρWB
α
between W and B in Gα by the induction
hypothesis. Note also that Y ←W is in Gα. To see it, note that Y and W are
adjacent in Gα since I(Gα) ⊆I(Gi). Recall that the nodes to the right of Y in α
are to right of Y in β too. If Y →W were in Gα then W would be to the right
of Y in α and, thus, W would be to the right of Y in β too. However, this would
contradict the fact that W is to the left of Y in β, which follows from the fact that
Gi is consistent with β. Thus, Y ←W is in Gα. Then, ρAX
α
∪X →Y ←W ∪ρWB
α
is an S-active route between A and B in Gα.
Case 2.3: Assume that Y /∈S. The proof of this case is based on that of step
8 in (Chickering, 2002, Lemma 30). Let D denote the node that is maximal in
Gα from the set of descendants of Y in Gi. Note that D is guaranteed to be
unique by (Chickering, 2002, Lemma 29), because I(Gα) ⊆I(Gi). Note also that
D ̸= Y , because Z is a descendant of Y in Gi and, as shown above, Y ←Z is in
Gα. We now show that D is a descendant of Z in Gi. We consider three cases.
Case 2.3.1: Assume that D = Z. Then, D is a descendant of Z in Gi.
Case 2.3.2: Assume that D ̸= Z and D was a descendant of Z in G0. Recall
that Method B2 percolates left-to-right in β one by one all the nodes in the
reverse order in which they appear in α. Method B2 is currently percolating
Y and, thus, it has not yet percolated Z because Z is to the left of Y in
α (recall line 4). Therefore, none of the descendants of Z in G0 (among
which is D) is to the left of Z in β. This and the fact that β is consistent
with Gi imply that Z is a node that is maximal in Gi from the set of
descendants of Z in G0. Actually, Z is the only such node by (Chickering,
2002, Lemma 29), because I(Gi) ⊆I(G0). Then, the descendants of Z in
G0 are descendant of Z in Gi too. Thus, D is a descendant of Z in Gi.
Case 2.3.3: Assume that D ̸= Z and D was not a descendant of Z in G0.
As shown in Case 2.3.2, the descendants of Z in G0 are descendant of Z in
Gi too. Therefore, none of the descendants of Z in G0 was to the left of D
in α because, otherwise, some descendant of Z and thus of Y in Gi would
6Note that maybe W = B. Note also that W ̸= X, because the case where W = X is covered by Case 2.1.

16
Method G2H(G, H)
/* Given two DAGs G and H such that I(H) ⊆I(G), the algorithm transforms
G into H by a sequence of arc additions and covered arc reversals such that
after each operation in the sequence G is a DAG and I(H) ⊆I(G) */
1
Let α denote a node ordering that is consistent with H
2
G=Method B2(G, α)
3
Add to G the arcs that are in H but not in G
Figure 5. Method G2H.
be to the left of D in α, which would contradict the deﬁnition of D. This
and the fact that D was not a descendant of Z in G0 imply that D was
still in G′ when Z became a sink node of G′ in Construct β (recall Figure
1). Therefore, Construct β added D to β after having added Z (recall lines
3-4), because D is to the left of Z in α by deﬁnition of D.7 For the same
reason, Construct β did not interchange D and Z in β afterwards (recall
line 6). For the same reason, Method B2 has not interchanged D and Z
in β (recall line 4). Thus, D is currently still to the left of Z in β, which
implies that D is to the left of Y in β, because Y is the left neighbor of Z
in β (recall line 3). However, this contradicts the fact that Gi is consistent
with β, because D is a descendant of Y in Gi. Thus, this case never occurs.
We continue with the proof of Case 2.3. Note that Y /∈S implies that ρY B
i+1 is
S-active in Gi+1 because, otherwise, ρAB
i+1 would not be S-active in Gi+1. Note
also that no descendant of Z in Gi is in S because, otherwise, there would be an
S-active route ρXY
i
between X and Y in Gi and, thus, ρAX
i+1 ∪ρXY
i
∪ρY B
i+1 would
be an S-active route between A and B in Gi+1 that would violate the minimality
property of ρAB
i+1.
This implies that D /∈S because, as shown above, D is a
descendant of Z in Gi. It also implies that there is an S-active descending route
ρZD
i
from Z to D in Gi. Then, ρAX
i+1 ∪X →Z ∪ρZD
i
is an S-active route between
A and D in Gi+1. Likewise, ρBY
i+1 ∪Y →Z ∪ρZD
i
is an S-active route between
B and D in Gi+1, where ρBY
i+1 denotes the route resulting from reversing ρY B
i+1.
Therefore, there are S-active routes ρAD
α
and ρBD
α
between A and D and between
B and D in Gα by the induction hypothesis.
Consider the subroute of ρAB
i+1 that starts with the arc X →Y and continues in
the direction of this arc until it reaches a node E such that E = B or E ∈S.
Note that E is a descendant of Y in Gi and, thus, E is a descendant of D in Gα
by deﬁnition of D. Let ρDE
α
denote the descending route from D to E in Gα.
Assume without loss of generality that Gα has no descending route from D to
B or to a node in S that is shorter than ρDE
α . This implies that if E = B then
ρDE
α
is S-active in Gα because, as shown above, D /∈S. Thus, ρAD
α
∪ρDE
α
is an
S-active route between A and B in Gα. On the other hand, if E ∈S then E ̸= D
because D /∈S. Thus, ρAD
α
∪ρDE
α
∪ρED
α
∪ρDB
α
is an S-active route between A
and B in Gα, where ρED
α
and ρDB
α
denote the routes resulting from reversing ρDE
α
and ρBD
α .
□
7Note that this statement is true thanks to our correction of Construct β.

17
Finally, we show how the correctness of Method B2 leads to an alternative proof of the so-
called Meek’s conjecture (Meek, 1997). Given two DAGs G and H such that I(H) ⊆I(G),
Meek’s conjecture states that we can transform G into H by a sequence of arc additions
and covered arc reversals such that after each operation in the sequence G is a DAG and
I(H) ⊆I(G). The importance of Meek’s conjecture lies in that it allows to develop eﬃcient
and asymptotically correct algorithms for learning BNs from data under mild assumptions
(Chickering, 2002; Chickering and Meek, 2002; Meek, 1997; Nielsen et al., 2003). Meek’s
conjecture was proven to be true in (Chickering, 2002, Theorem 4) by developing an algorithm
that constructs a valid sequence of arc additions and covered arc reversals. We propose an
alternative algorithm to construct such a sequence. The pseudocode of our algorithm, called
Method G2H, can be seen in Figure 5. The following corollary proves that Method G2H is
correct.
Corollary 1. Given two DAGs G and H such that I(H) ⊆I(G), Method G2H(G, H)
transforms G into H by a sequence of arc additions and covered arc reversals such that after
each operation in the sequence G is a DAG and I(H) ⊆I(G).
Proof. Note from Method G2H’s line 1 that α denotes a node ordering that is consistent with
H. Let Gα denote the MDI map of G relative to α. Recall that Gα is guaranteed to be unique
because I(G) is a graphoid. Note that I(H) ⊆I(G) implies that Gα is a subgraph of H. To
see it, note that I(H) ⊆I(G) implies that we can obtain a MDI map of G relative to α by
just removing arcs from H. However, Gα is the only MDI map of G relative to α.
Then, it follows from the proof of Theorem 5 that Method G2H’s line 2 transforms G into
Gα by a sequence of arc additions and covered arc reversals, and that after each operation
in the sequence G is a DAG and I(Gα) ⊆I(G). Thus, after each operation in the sequence
I(H) ⊆I(G) because I(H) ⊆I(Gα) since, as shown above, Gα is a subgraph of H. Moreover,
Method G2H’s line 3 transforms G from Gα to H by a sequence of arc additions. Of course,
after each arc addition G is a DAG and I(H) ⊆I(G) because Gα is a subgraph of H.
□
7. The Corrected Methods A and B are Efficient
In this section, we show that Methods A and B are more eﬃcient than any other solution to
the same problem we can think of. Let n and a denote, respectively, the number of nodes and
arcs in G. Moreover, let us assume hereinafter that a DAG is implemented as an adjacency
matrix, whereas a node ordering is implemented as an array with an entry per node indicating
the position of the node in the ordering. Since I(G) is a graphoid, the ﬁrst solution we can
think of consists in applying the following characterization of Gα: For each node A, PaGα(A)
is the smallest subset X ⊆Preα(A) such that A ⊥GPreα(A) \ X|X. This solution implies
evaluating for each node A all the O(2n) subsets of Preα(A). Evaluating a subset implies
checking a separation statement in G, which takes O(a) time (Geiger et al., 1990, p. 530).
Therefore, the overall runtime of this solution is O(an2n).
Since I(G) satisﬁes the composition property in addition to the graphoid properties, a more
eﬃcient solution consists in running the incremental association Markov boundary (IAMB)
algorithm (Pe˜na et al., 2007, Theorem 8) for each node A to ﬁnd PaGα(A). The IAMB
algorithm ﬁrst sets PaGα(A) = ∅and, then, proceeds with the following two steps. The ﬁrst
step consists in iterating through the following line until PaGα(A) does not change: Take any
node B ∈Preα(A)\PaGα(A) such that A̸⊥GB|PaGα(A) and add it to PaGα(A). The second
step consists in iterating through the following line until PaGα(A) does not change: Take any
node B ∈PaGα(A) that has not been considered before and such that A⊥GB|PaGα(A)\{B},
and remove it from PaGα(A). The ﬁrst step of the IAMB algorithm can add O(n) nodes to
PaGα(A). Each addition implies evaluating O(n) candidates for the addition, since Preα(A)
has O(n) nodes. Evaluating a candidate implies checking a separation statement in G, which

18
takes O(a) time (Geiger et al., 1990, p. 530). Then, the ﬁrst step of the IAMB algorithm
runs in O(an2) time. Similarly, the second step of the IAMB algorithm runs in O(an) time.
Therefore, the IAMB algorithm runs in O(an2) time. Since the IAMB algorithm has to be
run once for each of the n nodes, the overall runtime of this solution is O(an3).
We now analyze the eﬃciency of Methods A and B. To be more exact, we analyze Methods
A2 and B2 (recall Figure 3) rather than the original Methods A and B (recall Figure 1),
because the former are more eﬃcient than the latter. Methods A2 and B2 run in O(n3) time.
First, note that Construct β runs in O(n3) time. The algorithm iterates n times through lines
3-10 and, in each of these iterations, it iterates O(n) times through lines 5-8. Moreover, line 3
takes O(n2) time, line 6 takes O(1) time, and line 9 takes O(n) time. Now, note that Methods
A2 and B2 iterate n times through lines 2-8 and, in each of these iterations, they iterate O(n)
times through lines 3-7. Moreover, line 4 takes O(1) time, and line 5 takes O(n) time because
covering an arc implies updating the adjacency matrix accordingly. Consequently, Methods
A and B are more eﬃcient than any other solution to the same problem we can think of.
Finally, we analyze the complexity of Method G2H. Method G2H runs in O(n3) time:
α can be constructed in O(n3) time by calling Construct β(H, γ) where γ is any node
ordering, running Method B2 takes O(n3) time, and adding to G the arcs that are in H
but not in G can be done in O(n2) time. Recall that Method G2H is an alternative to the
algorithm in (Chickering, 2002). Unfortunately, no implementation details are provided in
(Chickering, 2002) and, thus, a comparison with the runtime of the algorithm there is not
possible. However, we believe that our algorithm is more eﬃcient.
8. Discussion
In this paper, we have studied the problem of combining several given DAGs into a con-
sensus DAG that only represents independences all the given DAGs agree upon and that
has as few parameters associated as possible. Although our deﬁnition of consensus DAG is
reasonable, we would like to leave out the number of parameters associated and focus solely
on the independencies represented by the consensus DAG. In other words, we would like
to deﬁne the consensus DAG as the DAG that only represents independences all the given
DAGs agree upon and as many of them as possible. We are currently investigating whether
both deﬁnitions are equivalent. In this paper, we have proven that there may exist several
non-equivalent consensus DAGs. In principle, any of them is equally good. If we were able to
conclude that one represents more independencies than the rest, then we would prefer that
one. In this paper, we have proven that ﬁnding a consensus DAG is NP-hard. This made
us resort to heuristics to ﬁnd an approximated consensus DAG. This does not mean that
we discard the existence of fast super-polynomial algorithms for the general case, or polyno-
mial algorithms for constrained cases such as when the given DAGs have bounded in-degree.
This is a question that we are currently investigating. In this paper, we have considered the
heuristic originally proposed by Matzkevich and Abramson (1992, 1993a,b). This heuristic
takes as input a node ordering, and we have shown that ﬁnding the best node ordering for
the heuristic is NP-hard. We are currently investigating the application of meta-heuristics in
the space of node orderings to ﬁnd a good node ordering for the heuristic. Our preliminary
experiments indicate that this approach is highly beneﬁcial, and that the best node ordering
almost never coincides with any of the node orderings that are consistent with some of the
given DAGs.
