Comparative Study on Generative Adversarial Networks
Saifuddin Hitawala

David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo
Abstract
In recent years, there have been tremendous ad-
vancements in the ﬁeld of machine learning.
These advancements have been made through
both academic as well as industrial research.
Lately, a fair amount of research has been ded-
icated to the usage of generative models in the
ﬁeld of computer vision and image classiﬁcation.
These generative models have been popularized
through a new framework called Generative Ad-
versarial Networks. Moreover, many modiﬁed
versions of this framework have been proposed
in the last two years. We study the original model
proposed by Goodfellow et al. (2014) as well as
modiﬁcations over the original model and pro-
vide a comparative analysis of these models.
1. Introduction
Machine learning as a ﬁeld has grown rapidly in the past
decade. Fields ranging from banking to healthcare, from
marketing to autonomous vehicles, all make use of machine
learning techniques. Accordingly, tremendous amount of
research in both academia and industry is dedicated to the
efﬁcient use of techniques and methodologies and develop-
ment of new techniques using machine learning. Research
papers related to natural language processing, sentiment
analysis, computer vision and object recognition, recom-
mender systems and information retrieval are published al-
most every day. Speciﬁcally, in the ﬁeld of computer vi-
sion and image classiﬁcation, a plethora of research has
been conducted in recent years. Some of this work is re-
lated to generative models and their usage in the ﬁelds of
supervised, semi-supervised and unsupervised learning.
Generative models as compared to discriminative models
have had less of an impact, due to the difﬁculty of approx-
imating many intractable probabilistic computations aris-
ing in maximum likelihood strategies and due to the dif-
ﬁculty of leveraging piecewise linear units in generative
context. Goodfellow et al. (2014) overcame this problem
by proposing a framework called adversarial nets, where a
generative model is pitted against an adversary which is a
discriminative network and learns to determine whether a
sample came from the generator or from the training data.
This model used multilayer perceptrons and was success-
ful at generating samples similar to the MNIST dataset
images. Consequently, due to the success and popularity
of adversarial nets, many modiﬁcations over the original
model have been proposed.
Some of the modiﬁed ver-
sions of Generative Adversarial Nets (GANs) that we re-
view in this study are: Conditional Generative Adversar-
ial Networks (CGAN) (Mirza & Osindero, 2014), Lapla-
cian Pyramid of Adversarial Networks (LAPGAN) (Den-
ton et al., 2015), Deep Convolutional Generative Adversar-
ial Networks (DCGAN) (Radford et al., 2015), Generative
Recurrent Adversarial Networks (GRAN) (Im et al., 2016),
Adversarial Autoencoders (AAE) (Makhzani et al., 2015),
Information Maximizing Generative Adversarial Networks
(InfoGAN) (Chen et al., 2016) and Bidirectional Gen-
erative Adversarial Networks (BiGAN) (Donahue et al.,
2016).
1.1. Motivation
The biggest motivation behind this study was the absence
of any other survey performing a comparative analysis of
the different versions of Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs). This absence was supplemented by the popular-
ity of generative models in recent years and their extensive
areas of application in the ﬁelds of computer vision and
image classiﬁcation. This comparative study tries to com-
pare the original and modiﬁed versions of GANs and com-
pare them on the basis of their network architectures, ba-
sic methodology and technique behind modiﬁcations, gra-
dient optimization calculations, experimental performance
and applications.
1.2. Paper Structure
The paper is structured in different sections. In Section
2, a background on Generative Adversarial Networks is
provided. Section 3 talks about the different versions of
arXiv:1801.04271v1  [cs.LG]  12 Jan 2018

Comparative Study on Generative Adversarial Networks
GANs, their methodologies, model architectures, and ex-
perimental performances. In Section 4, a comparison be-
tween different versions of GANs is provided based on dif-
ferent parameters. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper
suggesting future work in the ﬁeld of generative models.
2. Background: Generative Adversarial
Networks
Generative Adversarial Networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014)
consist of a pair of models called the generator and discrim-
inator. The generative models can be thought of as a group
of thieves trying to generate counterfeit currency whereas
the discriminative model can be thought of as police try-
ing to detect the counterfeit currency.
Thus, the entire
framework resembles a two-player minimax game where
the generator tries minimize its objective function and the
discriminator tries to maximize its objective function. The
objective of this game is given as follows:
min
G max
D V (D, G) = Ex∼pdata(x)[logD(x)]
+ Ez∼pz(z)[log(1 −D(G(z)))]
(1)
Figure 1. The structure of a Generative Adversarial Network
(GAN)
Here, we have a distribution pdata over data x and a prior
on input noise variables given by pz(z).
The genera-
tor learns through a differentiable function G(z; θg) rep-
resented by a multilayer perceptron with parameter θg.The
discriminator is given by D(x; θd). Also, D(x) gives the
probability that x came from data rather than pg. D is
trained to maximize logD(x) whereas G is trained to mini-
mize log(1−D(G(z))). The general architecture of a Gen-
erative Adversarial Net is shown in Figure 1.
Goodfellow et al. (2014) proposed an iterative approach of
optimization to avoid overﬁtting the discriminator D. Here,
they alternate between k steps of optimizing D and one step
of optimizing G. Also, it was found that equation (1) did
not provide sufﬁcient gradient for G to learn well. Thus,
the objective function in (1) can be modiﬁed such that in-
stead of training G to minimize log(1 −D(G(z))), we can
train G to maximize logD(G(z)). The modiﬁed objective
function is given as follows:
V (D, G) = max
D [Ex∼pdata(x)[logD(x)]+
Ez∼pz(z)[log(1−D(G(z)))]]+max
G Ez∼pz(z)[logD(G(z))]
(2)
In the next section, we discuss the various modiﬁcations
proposed to the Generative Adversarial Networks, their ar-
chitectures for generative and discriminative models, gradi-
ent calculations, experimental performance, usage and their
advantages and disadvantages.
3. Survey
3.1. Conditional Generative Adversarial Networks
Figure 2. The structure of a Conditional Generative Adversarial
Network (CGAN)
Conditional Generative Adversarial Networks(CGANs)
(Mirza & Osindero, 2014) are the conditional version of
GANs which are constructed by feeding the data y, we
want to condition on the generator and discriminator. Here
y can be any kind of information such as class labels or
data from other modalities. In the generator for CGANs,
the prior input noise pz(z) and the auxiliary information y

Comparative Study on Generative Adversarial Networks
Figure 3. The structure of a Laplacian Pyramid of Generative Adversarial Network (LAPGAN)
are combined in joint hidden representations. In the dis-
criminator, x and y are presented as inputs to the discrim-
inative function. Here, the objective function is similar to
that of vanilla GAN except that the data distributions are
now conditioned on y. This modiﬁed objective function is
given as follows:
min
G max
D V (D, G) = Ex∼pdata(x)[logD(x|y)]
+ Ez∼pz(z)[log(1 −D(G(z|y)))]
(3)
The architectural diagram of CGAN can be seen in Figure
2. Both, the generator and the discriminator are multilayer
perceptrons with Rectiﬁed Linear Units (ReLU) as the ac-
tivation for hidden layers and sigmoid for the output layer.
The model is trained using stochastic gradient descent with
initial learning rate of 0.1 exponentially decreased down to
.000001 with a decay factor of 1.00004. Mirza et al. (2014)
also demonstrate the use of CGANs for automated tagging
of images with multi-label predictions. This allows them to
generate a distribution of tag-vectors conditional on image
features.
3.2. Laplacian Pyramid of Adversarial Networks
Denton et al. (2015) proposed the generation of images
in a coarse-to-ﬁne fashion using cascade of convolutional
networks within a Laplacian pyramid framework. This ap-
proach allowed them to exploit the multiscale structure of
natural images, building a series of generative models, each
capturing image structure at a particular level of the Lapla-
cian pyramid.
The Laplacian pyramid is built from a Gaussian pyramid
using upsampling u(.) and downsampling d(.) functions.
Let G(I) = [I0, I1, ..., IK] be the Gaussian pyramid where
I0 = I and IK is k repeated applications of d(.) to I.
Then, the coefﬁcient hk at level k of the Laplacian pyra-
mid is given by the difference between the adjacent levels
in Gaussian pyramid, upsampling the smaller one with u(.).
hk = Lk(I) = Gk(I) −u(Gk+1(I) = Ik −u(Ik+1))
(4)
Reconstruction of the Laplacian pyramid coefﬁcients
[h1, ..., hK] can be performed through backward recur-
rence as follows:
Ik = u(Ik+1 + hk)
(5)
Thus, while training a LAPGAN, we have a set of convo-
lutional generative models G0, ..., GK, each of which cap-
tures the distribution of coefﬁcients hk for different levels
of the Laplacian pyramid. Here, while reconstruction, the
generative models are used to produce hk’s. Thus, equation
(5) gets modiﬁed as follows:
eIk = u(eIk+1) + ehk = u(eIk+1) + Gk(zk, u(eIk+1))
(6)
Here, a Laplacian pyramid is constructed from each train-
ing image I. At each level a stochastic choice is made re-
garding constructing the coefﬁcient hk using the standard
procedure or generate them using Gk. The entire procedure
for training a LAPGAN through various stages can be seen
in Figure 3.

Comparative Study on Generative Adversarial Networks
LAPGANs also take advantage of the CGAN model by
adding a low-pass image lk to the generator as well as
the discriminator. The authors evaluated the performance
of the LAPGAN model on three datasets: (i)CIFAR10
(ii)STL10 and (iii) LSUN datasets. This evaluation was
done by comparing the log-likelihood, quality of image
samples generated and a human evaluation of the samples.
3.3. Deep Convolutional Generative Adversarial
Networks
Radford et al.
(2015) proposed a new class of CNNs
called Deep Convolutional Generative Adversarial Net-
works (DCGANs) having certain architectural constraints.
These constraints involved adopting and modifying three
changes to the CNN architectures.
• Removing fully-connected hidden layers and replac-
ing the pooling layers with strided convolutions on
the discriminator and fractional-strided convolutions
on the generator
• Using batchnormalization on both the generative and
discriminative models
• Using ReLU activations in every layer of the genera-
tive model except the last layer and LeakyReLU acti-
vations in all layers of the discriminative model
Figure 4. The structure of a Deep Convolutional Generative Ad-
versarial Network (DCGAN)
Figure 4 depicts the DCGAN generator for LSUN sam-
ple scene modeling. The DCGAN model’s performance
was evaluated against LSUN, Imagenet1k, CIFAR10 and
SVHN datasets. The quality of unsupervised representa-
tion learning was evaluated by ﬁrst using DCGAN as a fea-
ture extractor and then the performance accuracy was cal-
culated by ﬁtting a linear model on top of those features.
Log-likelihood metrics were not used for performance eval-
uation. The authors also demonstrated feature learning by
the generator showcasing how the generator could learn to
forget scene components such as bed, windows, lamps and
other furniture. They also performed vector arithmetic on
face samples leading to good results.
3.4. Adversarial Autoencoders
Makhzani et al. (2015) proposed adversarial autoencoder
which is a probabilistic autoencoder which makes use of
GAN to perform variational inference by matching the ag-
gregated posterior of the hidden code vector of the autoen-
coder with an arbitrary prior distribution. In adversarial au-
toencoder, the autoencoder is trained with dual objectives
- a traditional reconstruction error criteria, and an adver-
sarial training criterion that matches the aggregated poste-
rior distribution of the latent representation to an arbitrary
prior distribution. After training, the encoder learns to con-
vert the data distribution to the prior distribution, while the
decoder learns a deep generative model that maps the im-
posed prior to the data distribution. The architectural dia-
gram of an adversarial autoencoder is shown in Figure 5.
Figure 5. The structure of an Adversarial Autoencoder (AAE)
Let x be the input and z be the latent code vector of an
autoencoder. Let p(z) be the prior distribution we want to
impose, q(z|x) be the encoding distribution and p(x|z) be
the decoding distribution. Also, let pd(x) be the data dis-
tribution and p(x) be the model distribution. The encoding
function of the autoencoder q(z|x) deﬁnes an aggregated
posterior distribution of q(z) on the hidden code vector of
the autoencoder as follows:
q(z) =
Z
x
q(z|x)pd(x)dx
(7)
In adversarial autoencoder, the autoencoder is regularized
by matching the aggregated posterior q(z) to an arbitrary
prior p(z). The generator of the adversarial network is also
the encoder of the autoencoder q(z|x). Both, the adver-
sarial network and the autoencoder are trained jointly with
stochastic gradient descent in two phases - the reconstruc-
tion phase and the regularization phase. In the reconstruc-
tion phase, the autoencoder updates the encoder and the
decoder to minimize the reconstruction error of the inputs.
In the regularization phase, the adversarial network ﬁrst up-
dates the discriminator to tell apart the true samples from

Comparative Study on Generative Adversarial Networks
the generated ones and then updates the generative model
in order to confuse the discriminator.
Labels can also be incorporated in AAEs in the adversar-
ial training phase in order to better shape distribution of
the hidden code. A one-hot vector is added to the input of
the discriminative network to associate the label with the
mode of distribution. Here, the one-hot vector acts as a
switch that selects the corresponding decision boundary in
the discriminative network given the class label. The one-
hot vector also contains one point corresponding to an ex-
tra class which in turn corresponds to unlabelled examples.
When an unlabelled example is encountered, the extra class
is turned on and the decision boundary for the full mixture
of Gaussian distribution is selected.
The authors evaluated the performance of adversarial au-
toencoders on MNIST and Toronto Face datasets using log-
likelihood analysis in supervised, semi-supervised and un-
supervised settings. In supervised settings, the one-hot vec-
tor of class labels is encoded and provided to the decoder.
The decoder utilizes both the one-hot vector and the hid-
den code z for reconstructing the image.In semi-supervised
settings, the generative description of unlabelled data is ex-
ploited. Here, it is assumed that data is generated by a latent
class variable y that comes from a categorical distribution
as well as a continuous latent variable z that comes from a
Gaussian distribution.
p(y) = Cat(y)
p(z) = N(z|0, I)
(8)
Here, the adversarial network and the autoencoder are
trained in three phases viz. the reconstruction phase, reg-
ularization phase and the semi-supervised classiﬁcation
phase. The ﬁrst two phases are similar to those in super-
vised settings. In the semi-supervised classiﬁcation phase
the autoencoder updates q(y|x) to minimize the cross-
entropy cost. In unsupervised settings, clustering is done
using a model with an architecture similar to that for semi-
supervised settings except for the fact that there is no semi-
supervised classiﬁcation stage.
Moreover, the inference
network q(y|x) predicts a one-hot vector whose dimension
is the number of categories that the data can be clustered
into. The authors also show how adversarial autoencoders
can be used for dimensionality reduction.
3.5. Generative Recurrent Adversarial Networks
Im et al. (2016) proposed recurrent generative model show-
ing that unrolling the gradient based optimization yields a
recurrent computation that creates images by incrementally
adding to a visual “canvas”. Here, the “encoder” convolu-
tional network extracts images of current “canvas”. The
resulting code and the code for the reference image get fed
to a “decoder” which decides on an update to the “canvas”.
Figure 6 depicts an abstraction of how a Generative Recur-
rent Adversarial Network works. The function f serves as
the decoder and the function gserves as encoder in GRAN.
Figure 6. The structure of a Generative Recurrent Adversarial
Network (GRAN)
In GRAN, the generator G consists of a recurrent feedback
loop that takes a sequence of noise samples dawn from the
prior distribution z ∼p(z) and draws the output at different
time steps C1, C2, ..., CT . At each time step t, a sample z
from the prior distribution is passed onto a function f(.)
with the hidden state hc,t where hc,t represents the current
encoded status of the previous drawing Ct−1. Ct is what
is drawn to the canvas at time t and it contains the output
of the function f(.). Moreover, the function g(.) is used
to mimic the inverse of the function f(.). Accumulating
the samples at each time step yields the ﬁnal sample drawn
to the canvas C. Ultimately, the function f(.) acts as a
decoder and receives the input from the previous hidden
state hc,t and noise sample z and the function g(.) acts as an
encoder that provides a hidden representation of the output
Ct−1 for time step t. Interestingly, compared to all other
auto-encoders which start by encoding an image, GRAN
starts with a decoder.
The authors propose a new evaluation metric for generative
models called Generative Adversarial Metric (GAM). This
metric compares two generative adversarial models by hav-
ing them engage in a “battle” against each other. Here the
generator and discriminator of the models are exchanged
and pitted against each other. If M1 and M2 are two gen-
erative adversarial models, then after training these models
during the test phase, model M1 plays against model M2
by having G1 trying to fool D2 and vice versa. Also, two
ratios using the discriminative scores of these models are
calculated:

Comparative Study on Generative Adversarial Networks
rtest def
= ϵ(D1(xtest))
ϵ(D2(xtest))
(9)
rsamples def
= ϵ(D1(G1(z)))
ϵ(D2(G2(z)))
(10)
where ϵ(.) outputs the classiﬁcation error rate. The test
ratio, rtest, tells us which model generalizes better as it is
based on discriminating the test data. The sample ratio,
rsamples, tells us which model can fool the other model
more easily, since the discriminators are classifying over
the samples generated by their opponents. The proposed
evaluation metrics qualify the sample ratio using the test
ratio by deﬁning the winning model as follows:
winner =





M1
if rsample < 1
and
rtest ≃1
M2
if rsample > 1
and
rtest ≃1
Tie
otherwise
(11)
The GRAN model’s performance was evaluated against
MNIST, CIFAR10 and LSUN datasets with time steps T =
1, 3, 5. It was found that GRAN with time steps T = 3
and T = 5 performed better than GRAN with time step
T = 1. Also, GRAN was compared against other gen-
erative models such as denoising VAE and DRAW on the
MNIST dataset. It was also found that the samples gener-
ated by GRAN were discernible and did not overﬁt on the
training data.
3.6. Information Maximizing Generative Adversarial
Networks
Information maximizing GANs (InfoGANs) (Chen et al.,
2016) are an information-theoretic extension of GANs that
are able to learn disentangled features in a completely un-
supervised manner. A disentangled representation is one
which explicitly represents the salient features of a data in-
stance and can be useful for tasks such as face recognition
and object recognition. Here, InfoGANs modify the objec-
tive of GANs to learn meaningful representations by maxi-
mizing the mutual information between a ﬁxed small subset
of GAN’s noise variables and observations.
In GANs, there are no restrictions on the manner in which
the generator may use the noise. As a result, the noise may
be used in a highly entangled way not corresponding to the
semantic features of the data. However, it makes sense to
semantically decompose a domain according to the seman-
tic features of the data under consideration. InfoGANs use
this approach by decomposing the input noise vector into
two parts: (i)z which is treated as a source of noise, (ii) c
called the latent code and targeted at the salient structured
semantic features of the data distribution. Thus, the gen-
erator network with both the incompressible noise z and
the latent code c becomes the generator G(z, c). In order to
avoid the latent code c being ignored, information-theoretic
regularization is done and the information I(c; G(z, c)) is
maximized. The information regularized minimax game is
given as follows:
min
G max
D V1(D, G) = V (D, G) −λI(c; G(z, c))
(12)
Experiments were performed on MNIST, SVHN, CelebA
and chairs datasets.
Disentangled representations could
easily be learned through the usage of discrete and con-
tinuous latent codes. For MNIST dataset, one categorical
code was used to model discontinuous variation in data and
two continuous codes were used to capture style such as ro-
tation and width of digits. Similarly, for the faces dataset,
a disentangled representation of azimuth(pose), elevation
and lighting were captured using continuous latent vari-
ables. Thus, InfoGANs can perform disentanglement high
semantic variations such as the presence or absence of sun-
glasses, hairstyles and emotions without any supervision.
Additionally, they require negligible computation cost on
top of GANs and are easy to train.
3.7. Bidirectional Generative Adversarial Networks
Donahue et al. (2016) proposed a method for learning the
semantics in data distribution as well as its inverse mapping
- using these learnt feature representations for projecting
data back into the latent space. The structure of a Bidirec-
tional Generative Adversarial Network is shown in Figure
7. As it can be seen from the ﬁgure, in addition to the
generator G from the standard GAN framework, BiGAN
includes an encoder E which maps the data x to latent rep-
resentations z. The BiGAN discriminator D discriminates
not only in the data space (x versus G(z)), but jointly in
data and latent spaces (tuples (x, E(x)) versus (G(z), z)),
where the latent component is either the encoder output
E(x) or generator input z. Here, according to the objec-
tive of GANs, the BiGAN encoder E should learn to invert
the generator G. The BiGAN training objective is deﬁned
as follows:
min
G,E max
D V (D, E, G) = Ex∼px Ez∼pE(.|x)[logD(x, z)]
|
{z
}
logD(x,E(x))
+ Ez∼pz Ex∼pG(.|z)[1 −logD(x, z)]
|
{z
}
log(1−D(G(z),z))
(13)
BiGAN share many properties of GANs while additionally
guaranteeing that at the global optimum, G and E are each

Comparative Study on Generative Adversarial Networks
Table 1. Comparison of different versions of GANs based on various criteria.
CRITERIA
VANILLA GAN
CGAN
LAPGAN
DCGAN
AAE
GRAN
INFOGAN
BIGAN
Learning
Supervised
Supervised
Unsupervised
Unsupervised
Supervised,
semi-supervised
and unsupervised
Supervised
Unsupervised
Supervised and
unsupervised
Network
Architecture
Multilayer
perceptrons
Multilayer
perceptrons
Laplacian
pyramid of
convolutional
networks
Convolutional
networks with
constraints
Autoencoders
Recurrent
convolutional
networks with
constraints
Multilayer
perceptrons
Deep multilayer
neural networks
Gradient Updates
SGD with k steps
for D and 1 step
for G
SGD with k steps
for D and 1 step
for G
No updates
SGD with Adam
optimizer for
both G and D
SGD with
reconstruction
and
regularization
steps
SGD updates to
both G and D
SGD updates to
both G and D
No updates
Methodology /
Objective
Minimize value
function for G
and maximize for
D
Minimize value
function for G
and maximize for
D conditioned on
extra information
Generation of
images in
coarse-to-ﬁne
fashion
Learn hierarchy
of
representations
from object parts
to scenes in both
G and D
Inference by
matching
posterior of
hidden code
vector of
autoencoder with
prior distribution
Generation of
images by
incremental
updates to a
“canvas”
Learn
disentangled
representations
by maximizing
mutual
information
Learn features
for related
semantic tasks
and use in
unsupervised
settings
Performance
Metrics
Log-likelihood
Log-likelihood
Log-likelihood
and human
evaluation
Accuracy and
error rate
Log-likelihood
and error-rate
Generative
Adversarial
Metric
(proposed)
Information
metric and
representation
learning
Accuracy
Figure 7. The structure of a Bidirectional Generative Adversarial
Network (BiGAN)
other’s inverse. Learning in BiGAN is done using stochas-
tic gradient descent by learning parameters θD, θG and θE
for modules D, G and E. In an iteration of optimization
using stochastic gradient descent, the discriminator param-
eters θD are updated by taking one or more steps in the
positive gradient direction. Then, the encoder and genera-
tor parameters, θE and θG are updated by taking one step
in the negative gradient direction. It was also observed that
training an inverse objective for E and G provided stronger
gradients.
The authors evaluated their BiGAN model by ﬁrst train-
ing them unsupervised and then transferring the encoder’s
learned feature representations for supervised learning
tasks. For permutation invariant MNIST dataset, each mod-
ule was trained as a multilayer perceptron and performed
comparatively at the same level as other methods. Next, Bi-
GAN were trained on the ImageNet LSRVC dataset where
each module is a convolutional network. It was found that
the convolutional ﬁlters learned by the encoder E had a
Gabor-like structure. Also, the BiGAN encoder E and the
generator G learned approximate inverse mappings.
4. Analysis
This section discusses different versions of GANs and pro-
vides a comparison between them.
It can be seen from Table 1. that initial versions of GANs
such as Vanilla GAN and Conditional GAN only supported
supervised learning which were later augmented to sup-
port semi-supervised and unsupervised learning.
More-
over, earlier adversarial frameworks used multilayer per-
ceptrons which were later experimented with other network
structures such as convolutional networks, autoencoders
and deep neural networks. Also, for most of the models,
Stochastic Gradient Descent based optimization was used
for training both the generator and discriminator networks.
The primary objective of any adversarial network remains
a 2-player minimax game over all versions.
Addition-
ally, some models had secondary objectives such as feature
learning and learning of representations through related se-
mantic tasks and then later using these learned features for
classiﬁcation or recognition in unsupervised settings. Also,
models such as LAPGAN and GRAN introduced a sequen-
tial generation of images by the generator using Laplacian
pyramids and recurrent networks.
Additionally, earlier models evaluated model performance
on the basis of log-likelihood estimates which was dis-
carded in later versions as it was not a good estimate. In-
stead accuracy and error rates were used for evaluating the
performance of a model. Also, GRAN proposed a new
evaluation metric called Generative Adversarial Metric for
evaluating the performance of generative adversarial nets

Comparative Study on Generative Adversarial Networks
although it has not been in use by any other generative
model.
5. Conclusion and Future Work
This paper provides a much-needed comparative analysis
of different versions of Generative Adversarial Networks
on the basis of their methodology, architecture and perfor-
mance. It can be seen that the later versions of adversarial
networks are more robust and have many more applications
compared to the original version. Also, these networks can
prove to be useful in image classiﬁcation, recognition, cap-
turing and generation in a variety of ways.
This work can be extended by comparing more recent ver-
sions of GANs such as Boundary-Seeking Generative Ad-
versarial Networks (Hjelm et al., 2017), Wasserstein Gen-
erative Adversarial Networks (WGAN) (Arjovsky et al.,
2017), Loss-Sensitive Generative Adversarial Networks
(Qi, 2017), Speech Enhancement Generative Adversarial
Networks (SEGAN) (Pascual et al., 2017) and Layered-
Recursive Generative Adversarial Networks (LR-GAN)
(Yang et al., 2017). Also, an empirical analysis can be
performed on all these versions using benchmark datasets
such as MNIST, CIFAR10 and ImageNet. Finally, a library
of these models could be implemented allowing future re-
searchers to utilize these models to their fullest in various
applications related to images as well as allowing them to
replicate results.
