Decentralized Control of Partially Observable Markov Decision
Processes using Belief Space Macro-actions
Shayegan Omidshaﬁei, Ali-akbar Agha-mohammadi, Christopher Amato, Jonathan P. How
Abstract— The focus of this paper is on solving multi-
robot planning problems in continuous spaces with partial
observability. Decentralized partially observable Markov de-
cision processes (Dec-POMDPs) are general models for multi-
robot coordination problems, but representing and solving Dec-
POMDPs is often intractable for large problems. To allow
for a high-level representation that is natural for multi-
robot problems and scalable to large discrete and continu-
ous problems, this paper extends the Dec-POMDP model to
the decentralized partially observable semi-Markov decision
process (Dec-POSMDP). The Dec-POSMDP formulation allows
asynchronous decision-making by the robots, which is crucial in
multi-robot domains. We also present an algorithm for solving
this Dec-POSMDP which is much more scalable than previous
methods since it can incorporate closed-loop belief space macro-
actions in planning. These macro-actions are automatically
constructed to produce robust solutions. The proposed method’s
performance is evaluated on a complex multi-robot package
delivery problem under uncertainty, showing that our approach
can naturally represent multi-robot problems and provide high-
quality solutions for large-scale problems.
I. INTRODUCTION
Many real-world multi-robot coordination problems oper-
ate in continuous spaces where robots possess partial and
noisy sensors. In addition, asynchronous decision-making
is often needed due to stochastic action effects and the
lack of perfect communication. The combination of these
factors makes control very difﬁcult. Ideally, high-quality
controllers for each robot would be automatically generated
based on a high-level domain speciﬁcation. In this paper, we
present such a method for both formally representing multi-
robot coordination problems and automatically generating
local planners based on the speciﬁcation. While these local
planners can be a set of hand-coded controllers, we also
present an algorithm for automatically generating controllers
that can then be sequenced to solve the problem. The result is
a principled method for coordination in probabilistic multi-
robot domains.
The most general representation of the multi-robot co-
ordination problem is the decentralized partially observ-
able Markov decision process (Dec-POMDP) [8]. Dec-
POMDPs have a broad set of applications including net-
working problems, multi-robot exploration, and surveillance
[9], [10], [20], [19]. Unfortunately, current Dec-POMDP
solution methods are limited to small discrete domains and
require synchronized decision-making. This paper extends
Omidshaﬁei, Agha, and How are with the Laboratory for Information
and Decision Systems (LIDS), MIT. Amato is with the Computer Science
and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL), MIT, Cambridge, MA.

Fig. 1.
Package delivery domain with key elements labeled.
some promising recent work on incorporating macro-actions,
temporally extended actions, [4], [5] to solve continuous
and large-scale problems which were infeasible for previous
methods.
Macro-actions (MAs) have provided increased scalability
in single agent MDPs [17] and POMDPs [1], [11], but they
are nontrivial to extend to multi-agent settings. Some of the
challenges in extending MAs to decentralized settings are:
• In the decentralized setting, synchronized decision-making
is problematic (or even impossible) as some robots must re-
main idle while others ﬁnish their actions. The resulting solu-
tion quality would be poor (or not implementable), resulting
in the need for MAs that can be chosen asynchronously by
the robots (an issue that has not been considered in the single
agent literature).
• Incorporating principled asynchronous MA selection is a
challenge, because it is not clear how to choose optimal MAs
for one robot while other robots are still executing. Hence, a
novel formal framework is needed to represent Dec-POMDPs
with asynchronous decision-making and MAs that may last
varying amounts of time.
• Designing these variable-time MAs also requires charac-
terizing the stopping time and probability of terminating at
every goal state of the MAs. Novel methods are needed that
can provide this characterization.
MA-based Dec-POMDPs alleviate the above problems by
no longer attempting to solve for a policy at the primitive
action level, but instead considering temporally-extended
actions, or MAs. This also addresses scalability issues, as
the size of the action space is considerably reduced.
In this paper, we extend the Dec-POMDP to the decen-
tralized partially observable semi-Markov decision process
(Dec-POSMDP) model, which formalizes the use of closed-
loop MAs. The Dec-POSMDP represents the theoretical
basis for asynchronous decision-making in Dec-POMDPs.
arXiv:1502.06030v1  [cs.MA]  20 Feb 2015

We also automatically design MAs using graph-based plan-
ning techniques. The resulting MAs are closed-loop and the
completion time and success probability can be characterized
analytically, allowing them to be directly integrated into
the Dec-POSMDP framework. As a result, our framework
can generate efﬁcient decentralized plans which take advan-
tage of estimated completion times to permit asynchronous
decision-making. The proposed Dec-POSMDP framework
enables solutions for large domains (in terms of state/action/
observation space) with long horizons, which are otherwise
computationally intractable to solve. We leverage the Dec-
POSMDP framework and design an efﬁcient discrete search
algorithm for solving it, and demonstrate the performance of
the method for the complex problem of multi-robot package
delivery under uncertainty (Fig. 1).
II. PROBLEM STATEMENT
A Dec-POMDP [8] is a sequential decision-making prob-
lem where multiple agents (e.g., robots) operate under un-
certainty based on different streams of observations. At
each step, every agent chooses an action (in parallel) based
purely on its local observations, resulting in an immediate
reward and an observation for each individual agent based
on stochastic (Markovian) models over continuous states,
actions, and observation spaces.
We deﬁne a notation aimed at reducing ambiguities when
discussing single agents and multi-agent teams. A generic
parameter p related to the i-th agent is noted as p(i),
whereas a joint parameter for a team of n agents is noted as
¯p = (p(1), p(2), · · · , p(n)). Environment parameters or those
referring to graphs are indicated without parentheses, for
instance pi refers to a parameter of a graph node, and pij to
a parameter of a graph edge.
Formally, the Dec-POMDP problem we consider in this
paper is described by the following elements:
• I = {1, 2, · · · , n} is a ﬁnite set of agents’ indices.
• ¯S is a continuous set of joint states. Joint state space
can be factored as ¯S = ¯X × Xe where Xe denotes the
environmental state and ¯X = ×iX(i) is the joint state
space of robots, with X(i) being the state space of the
i-th agent. X(i) is a continuous space. We assume Xe
is a ﬁnite set.
• ¯U is a continuous set of joint actions, which can be
factored as U = ×iU(i), where U(i) is the set of actions
for the i-th agent.
• State transition probability density function is denoted
as p(¯s′|¯s, ¯u), that speciﬁes the probability density of
transitioning from state ¯s ∈¯S to ¯s′ ∈¯S when the actions
¯u ∈¯U are taken by the agents.
•
¯R is a reward function: ¯R : ¯S × ¯U →R, the immediate
reward for being in joint state ¯x ∈¯X and taking the
joint action ¯u ∈¯U.
• ¯Ωis a continuous set of observations obtained by all
agents. It can be factored as ¯Ω= ¯Z × ¯Ze, where
¯Z = ×iZ(i) and ¯Ze = ×iZe(i). The set Z(i) × Ze(i)
is the set of observations obtained by the i-th agent.
Ze(i) is the observation signal that is a function of the
Dec-POSMDP 
Task  Macro-actions (TMA) 
Local Macro-actions (LMA) 
in belief space 
Agent 1 
Agent 2 
Agent 3 
Agent 4 
Fig. 2.
Hierarchy of the proposed planner. In the highest level, a
decentralized planner assigns a TMA to each robot. Each TMA encompasses
a speciﬁc task (e.g. picking up a package). Each TMA in turn is constructed
as a set of local macro-actions (LMAs). Each LMA (the lower layer) is a
feedback controller that acts as a funnel. LMAs funnel a large set of beliefs
to a small set of beliefs (termination belief of the LMA).
the environmental state xe ∈Xe. We assume the set of
environmental observations Ze(i) is a ﬁnite set for any
agent i.
• Observation probability density function h(¯o|¯s, ¯u) en-
codes the probability density of seeing observations
¯o ∈¯Ωgiven joint action ¯u ∈¯U taken and resulted
in joint state ¯s ∈¯S.
Note that a general Dec-POMDP need not have a factored
state space such as the one given here.
The solution of a Dec-POMDP is a collection of de-
centralized policies ¯η = (η(1), η(2), · · · , η(n)). Because (in
general) each agent does not have access to the observations
of other agents, each policy η(i) maps the individual data
history (obtained observations and taken actions) of the i-th
agent into its next action: ui
t = η(i)(H(i)
t ), where H(i)
t
=
{o(i)
1 , u(i)
1 , o(i)
2 , u(i)
2 , · · · , o(i)
t−1, u(i)
t−1, o(i)
t }.
According to above deﬁnition, we can deﬁne the value
associated with a given policy ¯η starting from an initial joint
state distribution ¯b:
V ¯η(¯b) = E
" ∞
X
t=0
γt ¯R(¯st, ¯ut)|¯η, p(¯s0) = ¯b
#
(1)
Then, a solution to a Dec-POMDP formally can be deﬁned
as the optimal policy:
¯η∗= arg max
¯η
V ¯η
(2)
The Dec-POMDP problem stated in (2) is undecidable
over continuous spaces without additional assumptions. Re-
cent work has extended the Dec-POMDP model to incorpo-
rate macro-actions which can be executed in an asynchronous
manner [5]. In planning with MAs, decision making occurs
in a two layer manner (see Fig. 2). A higher-level policy will
return a MA for each agent and the selected MA will return a
primitive action to be executed. This approach is an extension
of the options framework [17] to multi-agent domains while
dealing with the lack of synchronization between agents. The
options framework is a formal model of MAs [17] that has

been very successful in aiding representation and solutions
in single robot domains [12]. Unfortunately, this method
requires a full, discrete model of the system (including
macro-action policies of all agents, sensors and dynamics).
As an alternative, we propose a Dec-POSMDP model
which only requires a high-level model of the problem.
The Dec-POSMDP provides a high-level discrete planning
formalism which can be deﬁned on top of continuous spaces.
As such, we can approximate the continuous multi-robot
coordination problems with a tractable Dec-POSMDP for-
mulation. Before deﬁning our more general Dec-POSMDP
model, we ﬁrst discuss the form of MAs that allow for
efﬁcient planning within our framework.
III. HIERARCHICAL GRAPH-BASED MACRO-ACTIONS
This section introduces a mechanism to generate complex
MAs based on a graph of lower-level simpler MAs, which
is a key point in solving Dec-POSMDPs without explicitly
computing success probabilities, times, and rewards of MAs
in the decentralized planning level. We refer to the generated
complex MAs as Task MAs (TMAs).
To clarify the concepts, before describing task macro-
actions, we distinguish between open-loop and closed-loop
MAs. In general, MAs refer to temporally-extended actions
[18]. An l-step long open-loop MA is a sequence of pre-
deﬁned actions such as by u0:l = {u0, u1, · · · , ul}. However,
a closed-loop MA is policy π(·), i.e., a mapping from
histories to actions. As we discuss in the next section, for
a seamless incorporation of MAs in Dec-POMDP planning,
we need to design closed-loop MAs, which is a challenge in
partially-observable settings.
Generating a closed-loop MA that accomplishes a single-
agent task such as picking up an object, delivering a package,
opening a door, and so on, itself requires solving a POMDP
problem. In this paper, we utilize information roadmaps
[1] as a substrate to generate such task MAs. We start by
discussing the structure of feedback controllers in partially-
observable domains.
A macro-action π(i) for the i-th agent maps the histories
Hπ(i) of actions and observations that have occurred to
actions. Note that the environmental observations are only
obtained when the MA terminates. We compress this history
into a belief b(i) = p(x(i)|Hπ(i)), with joint belief for the
team denoted by ¯b = (b(1), b(2), · · · , b(n)). It is well known
[13] that making decisions based on belief b(i) is equivalent
to making decisions based on the history Hπ(i) in a POMDP.
For any given agent, a feedback controller in partially-
observable environment comprises a Bayesian ﬁlter bk+1 =
τ(bk, uk, zk+1) that evolves the belief and a separated con-
troller uk+1 = µ(bk+1) that generates control signals based
on the current belief (ﬁgure). Therefore, a feedback controller
L in belief space can be viewed as a function that maps the
current belief bk, control uk, and observation zk+1 to the pair
of next belief bk+1 and control uk+1; i.e., (bk+1, uk+1) =
L(bk, uk, zk+1) = (τ(bk, uk, zk+1), µ(τ(bk, uk, zk+1))).
A local MA we consider herein is a feedback controller
that is effective (has basin of attraction) locally in a region of
the state/belief space. Many controllers that rely on lineariza-
tion fall into this category as the linearization assumption
is valid in locally around the linearization point. The goal
of LMA in the partially-observable setting is to drive the
system’s belief to a particular belief. In [1] it has been shown
that in Gaussian belief space, utilizing a combination of
Kalman ﬁlter and linear controllers, the system’s belief can
be steered toward certain probability distributions. In other
words, LMAs act like a funnel in belief space. Starting from a
belief in the mouth of funnel (see Fig. 2), the LMA drives the
belief toward a target belief that is referred to as a milestone
herein.
Since LMAs act locally on belief space, we can locally
linearize the system and design corresponding simple LMAs.
In this paper, we assume the belief space is Gaussian and
thus belief can be represented with a mean vector ˆx+ and
covariance matrix P + denoted as b ≡(ˆx+, P +). For a
given state point v, we linearize the nonlinear process and
measurement equations to get a stationary linear system
with Gaussian noises. Associated with this linear system,
we design a stationary Kalman ﬁlter and a linear separated
controller, µ(b) = −L(ˆx+ −v). Thus, the utilized LMA
is parametrized by feedback gain matrix L and point v;
i.e., µ(b; θ), where θ = (L, v). It can be shown that under
appropriate choice of L and mild observability conditions,
this Linear LMA acts as a funnel in belief space that drives
the belief toward the milestone ˇb ≡(ˇx, ˇP), where ˇx = v
and ˇP is the solution of the Riccati equation corresponding
to the Kalman ﬁlter [1].
A chain of funnels is a sequence of funnels where the
target belief of each funnel falls into the mouth (or pre-
image) of the next funnel in the chain. A richer way of
combining funnels is via graphication (to form a graph of
funnels). An information roadmap is deﬁned as a graph of
funnels, where each node of this graph is a milestone and
each edge is an LMA funnel.
To construct a graph of LMAs, we sample a set of
parameters {θj} and generate corresponding LMAs {Lj}.
Associated with the j-th LMA, we compute the j-th mile-
stone ˇbj. We deﬁne the j-th node of our LMA graph as an
ϵ-neighborhood around the milestone; i.e., Bj = {b : ∥b −
ˇbj∥≤ϵ} and the set of all nodes as V = {Bj}. We connect
Bj to its k-nearest neighbors via their corresponding LMAs.
If neighboring nodes i and j are so far from each other that
the j-th LMA Lj cannot take the belief from i to j (since the
linearization used to construct Lj is not valid around Bi),
we utilize an edge controller (as detailed in [1]). An edge
controller is a ﬁnite-time controller whose role is to take the
mean of distribution close enough to the node Bj via tracking
a trajectory that connects vi to vj in the state space. Once
the distribution mean gets close enough to the target node,
the system’s control is handed over to the funnel associated
with the target node. We denote the concatenation of the edge
controller and the funnel utilized to take the belief from Bi
to Bj by Lij, which is deﬁned as the the (i, j)-th graph edge.
The set of all edges are denoted by L = {Lij}. We denote
the set of available LMAs at Bi by L(i). To incorporate

the lower-level state constraints (e.g., obstacles) and control
constraints, we consider B0 as a hypothetical node, hitting
which represents violation of constraints. We add B0 to the
set of nodes V. Therefore, taking any Lij there is a chance
that system ends up in B0.
We can simulate the behavior of LMA Lij at Bi ofﬂine
and compute the probability of landing in any given node
Br, which is denoted by P(Br|Bi, Lij). Similarly, we can
compute the reward of taking LMA Lij at Bi ofﬂine, which
is denoted by R(Bi, Lij) and deﬁned as the sum of one-
step rewards under this LMA. Finally, by T ij = T(Bi, Lij)
we denote the time it takes for LMA Lij to complete its
execution starting from Bi.
A. Utilizing TMAs in the Decentralized Setting
In a decentralized setting, the following properties of
the macro-action need to be available to the high-level
decentralized planner: (i) TMA value from any given initial
belief, (ii) TMA completion time from any given belief,
and (iii) TMA success probability from any given belief.
What makes computing these properties challenging is the
requirement that they need to be calculated for every possible
initial belief. Every belief is needed because when one
agent’s TMA terminates, the other agents might be in any
belief while still continuing to execute their own TMA. This
information about the progress of agents’ TMAs is needed
for nontrivial asynchronous TMA selection.
In the following, we discuss how the graph-based structure
of our proposed TMAs allows us to compute a closed-form
equation for the success probability, value, and time. As a
result, when evaluating the high-level decentralized policy,
these values can be efﬁciently retrieved for any given start
and goal states. This is particularly important in decentralized
multi-agent planning since the state/belief of the j-th agent
is not known a priori when the MA of i-th agent terminates.
A TMA policy is deﬁned as a policy that is found by
performing dynamic programming on the graph of LMAs.
Consider a graph of LMAs that is constructed to perform a
simple task such as open-the-door, pick-up-a-package, move-
a-package, etc. An important feature of this graph is that it
is multi-query, meaning that it is valid for any starting and
goal belief. Depending on the goal belief of the task, we can
solve the dynamic programming problem on the LMA graph
that leads to a policy which achieves the goal while trying
to maximize the accumulated reward and taking into account
the probability of hitting failure set B0. Formally, we need
to solve the following DP:
V ∗(Bi, π∗)=max
L∈L(i)

R(Bi, L)+
X
j
P(Bj|Bi, L)V ∗(Bj))

, ∀i
(3)
π∗(Bi)=arg max
L∈L(i)

R(Bi, L)+
X
j
P(Bj|Bi, L)V ∗(Bj)

, ∀i
where V ∗(·) is the optimal value deﬁned over the graph
nodes with V (Bgoal) set to zero and V (B0) set to a suitable
negative reward for violating constraints. π∗(·) is the result-
ing TMA. The primitive actions can be retrieved from TMA
via a two-stage computation: TMA picks the best LMA at
each milestone and LMA generates the next action based on
the perceived observations until belief reaches the next mile-
stone; i.e., uk+1 = L(bk, uk, zk+1) = π∗(B)(bk, uk, zk+1)
where B is the last visited milestone and L = π∗(B) is the
best LMA chosen by TMA at milestone B. The space of
TMAs is denoted as T = {π}.
For a given optimal TMA π∗, the associated optimal value
V ∗(Bi, π∗) from any node Bi is computed via solving
(3). Also, using Markov chain theory we can analytically
compute the probability P(Bgoal|Bi, π∗) of reaching the
goal node Bgoal under the optimal TMA π∗starting from
any node Bi in the ofﬂine phase [1].
Similarly, we can compute the time it takes for the TMA
to go from Bi to Bgoal under π∗as follows:
T g(Bi; π∗) = T(Bi, π∗(Bi))
+
X
j
P(Bj|Bi, π∗(Bi))T g(Bj; π∗), ∀i
(4)
where T g(B; π) denotes the time it takes for TMA π to
take the system from B to TMA’s goal. Deﬁning T i =
T(Bi; π∗(Bi)) and ¯T = (T 1, T 2, · · · , T n)T we can write
(4) in its matrix form as:
¯T g = ¯T + ¯P ¯T g ⇒¯T g = (I −¯P)−1 ¯T
(5)
where ¯T g is a column vector with i-th element equal to
T g(Bi; π∗) and ¯P is a matrix with (i, j)-th entry equal to
P(Bj|Bi, π∗(Bi)).
Therefore, a TMA can be used in a higher-level planning
algorithm as a MA whose success probability, execution
time, and reward can be computed ofﬂine.
B. Environmental State and Updated Model
We also extend TMAs to the multi-agent setting where
there is an environmental state that is locally observable by
agents and can be affected by other agents.
We denote the environment state (e-state) at the k-th
time step as xe
k
∈
Xe. It encodes the information in
the environment that can be manipulated and observed by
different agents. We assume xe
k is only locally (partially)
observable. An example for xe
k in the package delivery
application (presented in Section V) is “there is a package
in the base”. An agent can only get this measurement if the
agent is in the base (hence it is partial).
Any given TMA π is only available at a subset of e-
states, denoted by Xe(π). In many applications Xe(π) is a
small ﬁnite set. Thus, we can extend the cost and transition
probabilities of TMA π for all xe ∈Xe by performing the
TMA evaluation described in Section III-A for all xe ∈Xe.
We extend transition probabilities P(Bgoal|b, π) to take
the e-state into account, i.e., P(Bgoal, xe′|b, xe, π), which
denotes the probability of getting to the goal region Bgoal
and e-state xe′ starting from belief b and e-state xe under the
TMA policy π. Similarly, the TMA’s value function V (b, π)
is extended to V (b, xe, π), for all xe ∈Xe(π).
The joint reward ¯R(¯x, xe, ¯u) encodes the reward obtained
by the entire team, where ¯x = (x(1), · · · , x(n)) is the set of

states for different agents and ¯u = (u(1), · · · , u(n)) is the set
of actions taken by all agents.
We assume the joint reward is a multi-linear function of
a set of reward functions {R(1), · · · , R(n)} and RE, where
R(i) only depends on the i-th agent’s state and RE depends
on all the agents. In other words, we have:
¯R(¯x, xe, ¯u) = g

R(1)(x(1), xe, u(1)), R(2)(x(2), xe, u(2)),
· · · , R(n)(x(n), xe, u(n)), RE(¯x, xe, ¯u)

(6)
In multi-agent planning domains, often computing RE is
computationally less expensive than computing ¯R, which
is the property we exploit in designing the higher-level
decentralized algorithm.
The joint reward ¯R(¯b, xe, ¯u) encodes the reward obtained
by the entire team, where ¯b = (b(1), · · · , b(n)) is the joint
belief and ¯u is the joint action deﬁned previously.
Similarly, the joint policy ¯φ = {φ(1), · · · , φ(n)} is the set
of all decentralized policies, where φ(i) is the decentralized
policy associated with the i-th agent. In the next section, we
discuss how these decentralized policies can be computed
based on the Dec-POSMDP formulation.
Joint value ¯V (¯b, xe, ¯φ) encodes the value of executing the
collection ¯φ of decentralized policies starting from environ-
ment state xe
0 and initial joint belief ¯b.
IV. THE DEC-POSMDP FRAMEWORK
In this section, we formally introduce the Dec-POSMDP
framework. We discuss how the use of TMAs can transform
a continuous Dec-POMDP to a Dec-POSMDP over ﬁnite
number of MAs. This transformation allows discrete domain
algorithms to generate a decentralized solution for general
continuous problems.
We denote the high-level decentralized policy for the i-
th agent by φ(i) : Ξ(i) →T(i), where Ξ(i) is the macro-
action history for the i-th agent (as opposed to the action-
observation history), which is formally deﬁned as:
Ξ(i)
k =(ze,(i)
1
, π(i)
1 , H(i)
1 , ze,(i)
2
, π(i)
2 , H(i)
2 , . . . , π(i)
n−1, H(i)
n−1, ze,(i)
n
)
which includes the chosen macro-actions {π(i)
k }, the action-
observation histories under chosen macro-actions {H(i)
k },
and the environmental observations {ze,(i)
k
} received at the
termination of macro-actions. Accordingly, we can deﬁne a
joint policy ¯φ = (φ(1), φ(2), . . . , φ(n)) for all agents and a
joint macro-action policy as ¯π = (π(1), π(2), . . . , π(n)).
Each time an agent completes a TMA, it receives an
observation of the environmental state xe, denoted by oe.
Also, due to the special structure of the proposed TMAs,
we can record the agent’s ﬁnal belief bf at TMA’s ter-
mination (which compresses the entire history H under
that TMA). We denote this pair as ˘o = (bf, oe). As a
result, we can compress the macro-action history as Ξ(i) =
{˘o(i)
1 , π(i)
1 , ˘o(i)
2 , π(i)
2 , · · · , ˘o(i)
k−1, π(i)
k−1, ˘o(i)
k }.
The value of joint policy ¯φ is
¯V
¯φ(¯b) = E
" ∞
X
t=0
γt ¯R(¯st, ¯ut)|p(¯s0) = ¯b, ¯φ, {¯π}
#
,
(7)
but it is unclear how to evaluate this equation without
a full (discrete) low-level model of the domain. Even in
that case, it would often be intractable to calculate the
value directly. Therefore, we will formally deﬁne the Dec-
POSMDP problem, which has the same goal as the Dec-
POMDP problem (ﬁnding the optimal policy), but in this
case we seek the optimal policy for choosing macro-actions
in our semi-Markov setting:
¯φ∗= arg max
¯φ
¯V
¯φ
(8)
Deﬁnition 1: (Dec-POSMDP) The Dec-POSMDP frame-
work is described by the following elements
• I = {1, 2, · · · , n} is a ﬁnite set of agents’ indices.
• B(1) × B(2) × . . . × B(n) × Xe is the underlying state
space for the proposed Dec-POSMDP, where B(i) is the
set of beliefs of i-th agent’s TMAs (i.e., T(i)).
• T = T(1) × T(2) . . . × T(n) is the space of high-level
actions in Dec-POSMDP, where T(i) is the set of TMAs
for the i-th agent.
• P(¯b′, xe′, k|¯b, xe, ¯π) denotes the transition probability
under TMAs ¯π from a given ¯b, xe to ¯b′, xe′ as described
below.
•
¯Rτ(¯b, xe, ¯π) denotes the reward/value of taking TMA ¯π
at ¯b, xe as described below.
• ˘O is the set of environmental observations.
• P(¯˘o|¯b, xe) denotes the observation likelihood model.
Again, a general Dec-POSDMP need not have a factored
state space. Also, while the state space is very large, macro-
actions allow much of it to be ignored once these high-level
transition, reward and observation functions are calculated.
Below, we describe the above elements in more details.
For further explanation and derivations please see [16]. The
planner ¯φ = {φ(1), φ(2), · · · , φ(n)} that we construct in this
section is fully decentralized in the sense that each agent i
has its own policy φ(i) : Ξ(i) →T(i) that generates the next
MA based on the history of MAs taken and the observation
perceived solely by the i-th agent.
Each policy φ(i) is a discrete controller, represented by a
(policy) graph [3], [14]. Each node of the discrete controller
corresponds to a MA. Note that different nodes in the
controller could use the same MA. Each edge in this graph is
an ˘o. An example discrete controller for a package delivery
domain is illustrated in Fig. 3.
Consider a set of MAs ¯π = (π(1), π(2), · · · , π(n)) for the
entire team. Incorporating terminal conditions for different
agents, we can evaluate the set of decentralized MAs until
at least one of them stops as:
¯Rτ(¯b, xe, ¯π)=E
"¯τmin
X
t=0
γt ¯R(¯xk, xe
k, ¯uk)|¯π, p(¯x0)=¯b, xe
0 =xe
#
where
¯τmin = min
i
min
t {t : b(i)
t
∈B(i),goal}
(9)
It can be shown that the probability of transitioning
between two conﬁgurations (from ¯b, xe to ¯b′, xe′) after k

steps under the set of MAs ¯π is given by:
P(¯b′, xe′, k|¯b, xe, ¯π) = P(xe′
k ,¯b′
k|xe
0,¯b0, ¯π)
=
X
xe
k−1,¯bk−1
h
P(xe′
k |xe
k−1, ¯π(¯bk−1))×
P(¯b′
k|xe
k−1,¯bk−1, ¯π(¯bk−1))P(xe
k−1,¯bk−1|xe
0,¯b0, ¯π)

(10)
Joint value ¯V ¯φ(¯b, xe) then encodes the value of exe-
cuting the collection ¯φ of decentralized policies starting
from environment state xe
0 and initial joint belief ¯b0. The
below equation describes the value transformation from the
primitive actions to MAs, which is vital for allowing us to
efﬁciently perform evaluation. Details of this derivation can
be found in [16].
¯V
¯φ(¯b0, xe
0) = E
" ∞
X
t=0
γt ¯R(¯xt, xe
t, ¯ut)|¯φ,¯b0, xe
0
#
= E
" ∞
X
k=0
γtk ¯Rτ(¯btk, xe
tk, ¯πtk)|¯φ,¯b0, xe
0
#
(11)
where tk = mini mint{t > tk−1 : b(i)
t
∈B(i),goal} and
¯π = ¯φ(¯b, xe).
(12)
The dynamic programming formulation corresponding to
the deﬁned joint value function over MAs is:
¯V
¯φ(¯b,xe) = ¯Rτ(¯b, xe, ¯π)+
∞
X
k=0
γk X
¯b′,xe′
P(¯b′, xe′, k|¯b, xe, ¯π) ¯V
¯φ(¯b′, xe′)
(13)
The critical reduction from the continuous Dec-POMDP
to the Dec-POSMDP over a ﬁnite number of macro-actions
is a key factor in solving large Dec-POMDP problems. In
the following section we discuss how we compute a decen-
tralized policy based on the Dec-POSMDP formulation.
A. Masked Monte Carlo Search (MMCS)
In this section, we propose an efﬁcient method, referred to
as Masked Monte Carlo Search (MMCS), to generate a de-
centralized multi-agent solution to solve the Dec-POSMDP.
As demonstrated in Section V, MMCS allows extremely
large problems to be solved. It uses an informed Monte Carlo
policy sampling scheme to achieve this, exploiting results
from previous policy evaluations to narrow the search space.
Because the inﬁnite-horizon problem is undecidable [15],
inﬁnite-horizon methods typically focus on producing ap-
proximate solutions given a computational budget [14], [3].
A Monte Carlo approach can be implemented by repeatedly
randomly sampling from the policy space and retaining the
policy with the highest expected value as an approximate
solution. The search can be stopped at any point and the
latest iteration of the approximate solution can be utilized.
The MMCS algorithm is detailed in Alg. 1. MMCS uses a
discrete controller to represent the policy, φ(i), of each agent.
The nodes of the discrete controller are TMAs, π ∈T, and
edges are observations, ˘o ∈˘O. Each agent i transitions in
the discrete controller by completing a TMA πk, seeing an
Algorithm 1: MMCS
1 Procedure : MMCS(T, Kd)
2 input : set of TMAs, T, default number of best policies
to check in each iteration, Kd
3 output : decentralized policy ¯φ
4 foreach agent i do
5
masked(i) ←setToFalse();
6
φ(i)
d
←null;
7 for iterMMCS = 1 to itermax,MMCS do
8
for iterMC = 1 to itermax,MC do
9
φnew ←φd;
10
foreach agent i do
11
foreach (π, ˘o) ∈T × ˘O do
12
if not masked(i)(π, ˘o) then
13
φ(i)
new(π, ˘o) ←sample(T(π, ˘o));
14
φlist.append(φnew);
15
¯V ¯φ(¯b, xe).append(evalPolicy(φnew));
16
K ←Kd;
17
φlist ←getBestKPolicies(φlist, ¯V ¯φ(¯b, xe), K);
18
(masked, φd) ←createMask(φlist);
19
K ←1;
20
¯φ ←getBestKPolicies(φlist, ¯V ¯φ(¯b, xe), K);
21 return ¯φ;
observation ˘ok, and following the appropriate edge to the
next TMA, πk+1. Fig. 3 shows part of a single robot’s policy.
MMCS initially generates a set of valid policies by ran-
domly sampling the policy space (Line 13), while adhering
to the constraint that the termination set of a TMA node in
the discrete controller must intersect the initiation set of its
child TMA node. The joint value, ¯V ¯φ(¯b, xe), of each policy
given an initial joint belief, ¯b, and e-state, xe, is calculated
by repeatedly applying the policy (either in a simulator or a
real-world system) and taking its expected value (Line 15).
MMCS identiﬁes the TMA transitions that occur most
often in the set of policies with the K highest joint values,
in a process called ‘masking’ (Line 18). It then opts to
include these transitions in future iterations of the policy
search by explicitly checking for the existence of a mask
for that transition, preventing the transition from being re-
sampled (Line 12). Note that the mask is not permanent, as
re-evaluation of the mask using the best K policies occurs
in each iteration of MMCS (Line 18).
The above process is repeated until a computational budget
is reached, after which the best policy is selected as the
approximate solution to the Dec-POSMDP (Line 20). Our
algorithm offers the advantage of balancing exploration and
exploitation of the search space. Although ‘masking’ places
focus on promising policies, it is done in conjunction with
random sampling, allowing previously unexplored regions of
the policy space to be sampled.

V. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we consider a package delivery under
uncertainty scenario involving a team of heterogeneous
robots, an application which has recently received particular
attention [2], [7]. The overall objective in this problem is to
retrieve and deliver packages from base locations to delivery
locations using a group of robots.
Though our method is general and can be used for many
decentralized planning problems, this domain was chosen
due to its extreme complexity. For instance, the policy space
of the posed problem has cardinality 5.622e+17, making it
computationally intractable to solve. Additional challenges
stem from the presence of different sources of uncertainty
(wind, actuator, sensor), obstacles and constraints in the
environment, and different types of tasks (pick-up, drop-
off, etc.). Also, the presence of joint tasks such as joint
pickup of large packages introduces a signiﬁcant multi-robot
coordination component. This problem is formulated as a
Dec-POMDP in continuous space, and hence current Dec-
POMDP methods are not applicable. Even if we could mod-
ify the domain to allow them to be used, simply discretizing
the state/action/observation space in this problem would lead
to poor solution quality or a computationally intractable Dec-
POMDP.
Fig. 1 illustrates the package delivery domain. Robots
are classiﬁed into two categories: air vehicles (quadcopters)
and ground vehicles (trucks). Air vehicles handle pickup
of packages from bases, and can also deliver packages to
two delivery locations, Dest1 and Dest2. An additional
delivery location Destr exists in a regulated airspace, where
air vehicles cannot ﬂy. Instead, packages destined for the
regulated airspace zone must be handed off to a ground
vehicle at a rendezvous location. The ground vehicle is solely
responsible for deliveries in this regulated region. Rewards
are given to the team only when a package is dropped off at
its correct delivery destination.
Packages are available for pickup at two bases in the
domain. Each base contains a maximum of one package,
and a stochastic generative model is used for allocating
packages to bases. Each package has a designated delivery
location, δ ∈∆= {d1, d2, dr}. Additionally, each base has
a size descriptor for its package, ψ ∈Ψ = {∅, 1, 2}, where
ψ = ∅indicates no package at the base, ψ = 1 indicates
a small package, and ψ = 2 indicates a large package.
Small packages can be picked up by a single air vehicle,
whereas large packages require cooperative pickup by two air
vehicles. The descriptors of package destinations and sizes
will implicitly impact the policy of the decentralized planner.
To allow coordination of cooperative TMAs, an environ-
ment variable stating the availability of a nearby vehicle,
φ ∈Φ = {0, 1}, is observable by robots at any base or at
the rendezvous location, where φ = 1 signiﬁes that another
robot is at the same milestone (or location) as the current
robot and φ = 0 signiﬁes that all other robots are outside of
some radius of the current robot’s location.
An robot at any base location can, therefore, observe the
environmental state xe = (ψ, δ, φ) ∈Ψ × ∆× Φ, which
Go To Base 1
Pick Up Package
Go To Delivery 
Destination 1
Put Down 
Package
Go To Base 2
(ψ = 1, δ = 1, ϕ = 0)
(ψ = 1, δ = 1, ϕ = 0)
(ψ = 2, δ = 3, ϕ = 0)
Fig. 3.
Partial segment of a single robot’s policy obtained using MMCS
for the package delivery domain. In this discrete policy controller, nodes
represent TMAs and edges represent e-states. Greyed out edges represent
connections to additional nodes which have been excluded to simplify the
ﬁgure.
contains details about the availability and the size of the
package at the base (if it exists), the delivery destination of
the package, and availability of nearby robots (for performing
cooperative tasks). An robot at the rendezvous location can
observe xe = φ ∈Φ for guidance of rendezvous TMAs.
In this mission, we assume one ground robot and two air
robots are used. We consider two base locations Base1 and
Base2. Air robots are initially located at Base1 and the
ground robot is at Destr. If bi ∈Basej, we say the i-th
robot is at the j-th base.
The available TMAs in this domain are:
• Go to base Basej for j ∈{1, 2}
– robots involved: 1 air robot.
– Initiation set: Air robot i is available, where i ∈
{ia,1, ia,2}.
– Termination set: robot i available and its belief is
bi ∈Bhj.
• Go to delivery destination Destj for j ∈{1, 2, r}
– robots involved: 1 (any type)
– Initiation set: robot i available, can be at any
location.
– Termination set: robot i available and its belief is
bi ∈Bdj.
• Joint go to delivery destination Destj for j ∈{1, 2}
– robots involved: 2 air robots.
– Initiation set: Air robots ia,1 and ia,2 are available.
– Termination set: robots ia,1 and ia,2 are available
and their beliefs are bia,1 ∈Bdj, bia,2 ∈Bdj,
where j ∈{1, 2}.
• Pick up package
– robots involved: 1 air robot
– Initiation set: Air robot i is available, where i ∈
{Ia,1, Ia,2}. xe = {ψ = 1, δ ∈∆, φ ∈Φ}
– Termination set: Ground robot i is carrying package
and is unavailable.
• Joint pick up package
– robots involved: 2 air robots.

– Initiation set: Air robots ia,1 and ia,2 are available.
xe = {ψ = 2, δ ∈∆, φ = exact}
– Termination set: robots ia,1 and ia,2 are carrying
package and are unavailable.
• Put down package
– robots involved: 1 ground robot or 1 air robot.
– Initiation set: robot i ∈I is carrying package, bi ∈
Bdj, where j ∈{1, 2}
– Termination set: robot i is available.
• Joint put down package
– robots involved: 2 air robots.
– Initiation set: Air robots ia,1 and ia,2 are available
and jointly carrying a package. bi1 ∈Bdj and bi2 ∈
Bdj, where j ∈{1, 2}.
– Termination set: robots ia,1 and ia,2 are available
and their beliefs are bia,1 ∈Bdj, bia,2 ∈Bdj,
where j ∈{1, 2}.
• Go to rendezvous location
– robots involved: 1 ground robot or 1 air robot
– Initiation set: robot i ∈I is available.
– Termination set: robot i is available and its belief
is bi ∈Bdr.
• Place package on truck
– robots involved: 1 air robot, 1 ground robot.
– Initiation set: Air robot ia
∈{Ia,1, Ia,2} and
ground robot ig are available and located at ren-
dezvous location, where bia ∈Bdr and bia ∈Bdr.
– Termination set: robots ia and ig are available and
their beliefs are bia ∈Bdj, big ∈Bdj, where j ∈
{1, 2}.
• Wait at current location
– robots involved: 1 ground robot or 1 air robot.
– Initiation set: robot i ∈I is available.
– Termination set: robot i is available.
Each TMA is deﬁned with an associated initiation and ter-
mination set. For instance, “Go to Basej” TMA is deﬁned:
• robots involved: 1 air robot.
• Initiation set: An air robot i is available.
• Termination set: robot i available and b(i) ∈Basej.
The robot’s belief and the environmental state affect the
TMA’s behavior when undertaken. For instance, the behavior
of the “Go to Basej” TMA will be affected by the presence
of obstacles for different robots. For details on the deﬁnition
of other TMAs, see [16].
To generate a closed-loop policy corresponding to each
TMA, we follow the procedure explained in Section III. For
example, for the “Go to Basej” TMA, the state of system
consists of the air robot’s pose (position and orientation).
Thus, the belief space for this TMA is the space of all
possible probability distributions over the system’s pose. To
follow the procedure in Section III, we incrementally sample
beliefs in the belief space, design corresponding LMAs,
generate a graph of LMAs, and solve dynamic programming
on this graph to generate the TMA policy. Fig. 4 shows
the performance of an example TMA (“Go to Dest1”). The
results show that the macro-action is optimized to achieve the
goal in the manner that produces the highest value, but the
performance is robust to noise and tends to minimize the con-
straint violation probability. The most important observation
is that the value function is available over the entire space.
The same is true for the success probability and completion
time of the TMA. This information can then be directly used
by the MMCS algorithm to perform evaluation of policies
that use this macro-action.
A portion of an example policy for a single air robot
in the package delivery domain is illustrated in Fig. 3.
The policy involves going to Base1 and observing xe.
Subsequently, the robot chooses to either pick up the package
(alone or with another robot) or go to Base2. The full
policy controller includes more nodes than shown in Fig.
3 (for all possible TMAs) as well as edges (for all possible
environment observations).
Fig. 5 compares a uniform random Monte Carlo search
to MMCS in the package delivery domain. Results for the
Monte Carlo search were generated by repeatedly sampling
random, valid policies and retaining the policy with the high-
est expected value. Both approaches used a policy controller
with a ﬁxed number of nodes (nnodes = 13).
Results indicate that given a ﬁxed computational budget
(quantiﬁed by the number of search iterations), MMCS out-
performs standard Monte Carlo search in terms of expected
value. Speciﬁcally, as seen in Table I, after 1000 search
iterations in the package delivery problem, the expected value
of the policy from MMCS is 118% higher than the one
obtained by Monte Carlo search. Additionally, due to this
problem’s extremely large policy space, determination of an
optimal joint value through exhaustive search is not possible.
To more intuitively quantify performance of MMCS and
Monte Carlo policies in the package delivery domain, Fig. 7
compares success probability of delivering a given minimum
number of packages for both methods, within a ﬁxed mission
time horizon. Results were generated over 250 simulated runs
with randomly-generated package types and initial conditions
for robots. Using the Monte Carlo policy, probability of
successfully delivering more than 2 packages given a ﬁxed
time horizon is almost negligible, whereas the policy result-
ing from MMCS successfully delivered a larger number of
Delivery location 
Base location 
Obstacles 
Fig. 4.
This ﬁgure shows the value of “Go to Dest1” TMA over its belief
space (only the 2D mean part is shown).

0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Iteration
Policy Value
 
 
Monte Carlo Search
MMCS
Fig. 5.
Comparison of best policy value over 1000 iterations for Monte
Carlo and MMCS.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Iteration
Policy Value
 
 
Monte Carlo Search Samples
Monte Carlo Search Moving Average (n = 100)
MMCS Samples
MMCS Moving Average (n = 100)
Fig. 6.
Comparison of policy sampling differences between Monte Carlo
and MMCS. MMCS allows exploration of the policy space while exploiting
knowledge of promising policies.
packages (in some cases up to 9).
The experiments indicate that the Dec-POSMDP frame-
work and our MMCS algorithm allow high-quality solutions
to be generated for complex problems, such as multi-robot
package delivery, that would not be possible using traditional
Dec-POMDP approaches.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper proposed a layered framework to exploit
the macro-action abstraction in decentralized planning for
a group of robots acting under uncertainty. It formally
reduces the Dec-POMDP problem to a Dec-POSMDP that
can be solved using discrete space search techniques. We
have additionally formulated an algorithm, MMCS, for
solving Dec-POSMDPs and have shown its performance on
a multi-robot package delivery problem under uncertainty.
The Dec-POSMDP represents a general formalism for
probabilistic multi-robot coordination problems and our
results show that high-quality solutions can be automatically
generated
from
this
high-level
domain
speciﬁcation.
