A Method for Restoring the Training Set Distribution in an 
Image Classifier 
An Extension of the Classifier-To-Generator Method 
Alexey Chaplygin & Joshua Chacksfield 
Data Science Research Group, Department of Analytics and Business Intelligence, PVH Corp.  

 
ABSTRACT 
Convolutional Neural Networks are a well-known staple 
of modern image classification.  However, it can be 
difficult to assess the quality and robustness of such 
models.  Deep models are known to perform well on a 
given training and estimation set, but can easily be fooled 
by data that is specifically generated for the purpose.  It 
has been shown that one can produce an artificial 
example that does not represent the desired class, but 
activates the network in the desired way.  This paper 
describes a new way of reconstructing a sample from the 
training set distribution of an image classifier without 
deep knowledge about the underlying distribution.  This 
enables access to the elements of images that most 
influence the decision of a convolutional network and to 
extract meaningful information about the training 
distribution. 
1. Introduction 
While convolutional neural networks have been shown to 
have great performance on image classification tasks [1], 
these deep Networks are generally seen as “black boxes” 
and are believed to be hard to analyse after training.  In 
recent years a number of techniques derived from 
adversarial examples were invented which are capable of 
fooling such image classifiers.  Creating an adversarial 
example is an easy task, and can produce comically 
wrong results (See Figure 1) for text captioning.  In the 
realm of image classification it has been shown that 
images can be generated that are classified with a high 
confidence but are unrecognisable to humans [2].   
The miss categorisation of images can cause serious 
issues in commercially available classifiers, leaving them 
open to attacks and potential vulnerabilities.  The 
question as to which features influence the output of a 
convolutional network is often posed and is difficult to 
answer due to the lack of knowledge and understanding 
of the internals of convolutional networks.  
Several techniques have been developed that provide 
insights into the internals of trained models.  Such 
approaches range from simply slicing the convolutional 
layers of a network and visualising the neurons to 
constructions called grad cams or guided grad cams [3].  
However all of these techniques require samples from the 
distribution upon which the model was trained and do not 
show the limits of each trained classifier. Acquiring a 
sample of training data can be difficult in cases where the 
nature of a classifier is barely known and is not trained on 
a standard open dataset such as ImageNet.   
There are multiple cases where the nature of the classifier 
might be unknown, for example digital locks that use iris, 
retina or facial recognition.  Another potential use for the 
described method is to determine the distribution of data 
upon which an image classifier was trained and access 
whether the classifier could be applied to a particular 
problem.  
2. Related Work 
There has been some other research conducted, 
independent of this article, which aimed to provide a 
view into the training distribution.  Anonymous authors 
detailed an investigation titled “Classifier-to-Generator 
Attack: Estimation of Training Data Distribution from 
Classifier”, which generally coincides with the findings 
in this paper, that the training distribution can be 
reconstructed from a classifier.  
However, the main difference between classifier-to-
generator attack approach and the approach described 
below is that this approach does not require structural 
similarity between the substrate and distribution to 
restore an auxiliary dataset.  The aforementioned paper 
used very similar datasets for both, which implies a good 

understanding of the distribution of the training set of the 
classifier.  Another difference is the use of Conditional 
GAN (Conditional Generative Adversarial Nets) in this 
paper as opposed to classic GAN.  This was in order to 
have a substrate image as a starting point of the 
reconstruction. When using a classic GAN [4] the model 
was unable to restore a distribution of unknown nature 
and wasn’t applicable in our case (Figure 2). 
Note: 
This paper is the result of a project executed for PVH 
Europe where the business need was to try to generate 
body-wear with prints/patterns that have a definite 
association with some defined category, but does not 
repeat in the exact full details of the object. In such a way 
interesting prints that remind us of objects from nature 
can be created, if to use a blank piece of clothes as a 
substrate.  
For a better understanding of the results and the way of 
repeating the experiment a practitioners approach was 
used rather than academic. 
3. Methodology 
In this example a VGG16 network was used, pre-trained 
on 1000 classes, but this method could be applied to any 
image classifier.  The 1000 classes were filtered down to 
5 classes that were to be reconstructed and are 
represented from here on as the target vector 
 ⃗ {   }  (
  
  
 
  
) 
where    .  During training only one class was ever 
positive per batch of   images with the active class 
selected randomly with equal probability for each batch 
of images. 
To generate the images a Conditional GAN was used.  
The generator,   (Figure 4) was constructed such that, for 
each convolution layer, the input was padded and filters 
of size 4 were applied with a stride of size 2.  Lastly a 
      (Parameterised Leaky ReLU function initialised 
to 0.2) was applied to improve model fitting [5].  The 
deconvolution layers were constructed in a similar 
manner, using filters of size 4, applied with a stride of 
size 2, also applying       for all but the last layer for 
which      function was used.  
A random substrate image of size of 512x512 was 
convolved into feature maps of sizes between 16x16 and 
128x128. The input to the deconvolutional layer was a 
“Tiled Class Input” created by a function, 
 (  )    {   }       
where    represents the elements of  ⃗ and  
 (  )  {
{ }   
  ( (   )   (    ))
    
(    )
(    ) 
such that   is a function applied to each element of a 
vector  ⃗ that returns an       matrix if the input 
Figure 1. Adversarial examples crafted by Show-and-Fool using
the targeted caption method [12]. Examples showing how
alterations to images can cause gross ‘misclassification’ of
images.  Top of each pair shows the original image with the 
correctly generated text.  Bottom of each pair contains the crafted 
example that results in highly different caption to be generated.  
Figure 2. These are some of results which best showed the required 
categories, when using only classic GAN as opposed to while using 
Conditional GAN. 

element     .  Otherwise if      the result was a 
random matrix where each element was selected from the 
union of two distributions,   (   ) and  (    ) also of 
size    . The result is a 3 dimensional matrix (     ) 
where   is the size of vector  ⃗. 
This construct was put to the deconvolutional layers 
along with a U-Net structure where the feature maps of 
the convolutional part of   are also concatenated to the 
deconvolutional layers outputs and fed to the next layer 
[6] to reconstruct an image of size 512x512 (Figure 4).  
During training Weight Normalization was applied 
together with Parametric Leaky ReLU for faster 
convergence and improved stability [7]. 
The discriminative part   of our Condition GAN was a 
basic CNN based on PatchGAN architecture [8].  The 
substrate image and output of   are supplied to the 
network as inputs (Figure 3). 
Multiple loss functions were used to construct the 
objective function for this project.  There are four parts to 
the loss function used, firstly a canonical GAN loss, for 
which   is defined as the observed image,   the noise 
component and   the output image, are all passed to the 
network. 
          [    (   )]
     [   (   (   (   )))] 
where   tries to minimise this against adversarial   that 
tries to maximise, i.e.                    (   ) 
[9].  Secondly, a masking loss, 
      ( ) 
where  ( ) is the masked output of the model and   is 
the unit matrix.  For the situation in which the model was 
to be applied it was desired to keep the background of the 
image as white as possible, which was accomplished by 
penalizing any output other than white. 
A pre-trained VGG16 classifier was used to penalize 
output (as seen in Figure 5) in the following way.  Let   
be the set of all square crops of size 224 pixels in the 
image generated by the GAN.  Let          
                  be three distinct crops selected 
randomly with equal probability. Let 
 ⃗⃗ [   ]  (
  
  
 
  
) 
be the vector of outputs from the VGG classifier for   
classes.  After processing the three random crops and 
Substrate 
image, 
512x512  
Conv, 8, 256x256 
Conv, 32, 128x128 
Conv, 64, 64x64 
Conv, 80, 32x32 
Conv, 112, 16x16 
Tiled Class Input 
Deconv, 576, 16x16 
Deconv, 512, 32x32 
Deconv, 256, 64x64 
Deconv, 128, 128x128 
Deconv, 64, 256x256 
Deconv, 3, 512x512 
Figure 4. Architecture of the generator 𝑮 used in the conditional 
GAN. 
 
 
3 random crops, 
224x224 
 
Resized image 
224x224 
VGG16 
classifier 
 
Generated 
image 
512x512 
Figure 5. For each generated image a loss was applied to determine
whether the required categories were present on the image.
Classification was performed in two different ways, firstly on the whole 
image resized and secondly to three random crops.  The classifications
were then used in the loss 𝑳𝑽𝑮𝑮. 
Deconv, 3, 
512x512 
Substrate image, 
512x512  
Conv, 64, 256x256 
Conv, 128, 128x128 
Conv, 256, 64x64 
Conv, 512, 32x32 
Conv, 512, 16x16 
Conv, 512, 15x15, 
stride = 1 
Conv, 512, 14x14, 
stride = 1, sigmoid 
Figure 3. Architecture of the discriminative part 𝑫 of the conditional 
GAN, used in conjunction with the generator 𝑮. 

resized image a vector with the probability of each class 
was resolved,  ⃗ ,  ⃗ ,  ⃗ and  ⃗  respectively. 
The difference from the target,  ⃗ for positive classes was 
calculated upon the whole resized image only as 
 ( ⃗)  | ⃗  ⃗|   ⃗ 
and the difference for negative classes was calculated 
upon the three random crops as 
  ( ⃗)  | ⃗  ⃗|  (   ⃗ ) 
where,        is defined as the element wise 
multiplication of two vectors or         for ‘element’ 
           in each vector.  
The final loss constraint for the classifiers category being 
present on the generated image was constructed from two 
parts, the positive classes appearing in the entire picture 
and the negative classes in the random crops.  For each a 
simple summation of a linear and logarithmic term is 
applied to a vector  ⃗ [   ]   calculated as 
 ( ⃗)   
 ∑(      (    ))
 
 
 
So for each of the crops the loss term for appearance of 
negative categories is 
      ({   (  ⃗)    ⃗   ⃗    ⃗    ⃗  }) 
and for the require class in the resized image 
      ( ⃗ ) 
which results in the total loss for the categories being the 
combination of the positive and negative classes. 
           
In that way we prevent the situation when all categories 
are being merged together and shown simultaneously. 
With a certain frequency we require a model to generate 
image free of any ImageNet category. 
An extra addition to the loss was a term named the 
substrate loss.  This was a term that encouraged the 
model to reconstruct an output similar to the substrate 
image.  It is calculated as, 
   |   |     (  |   
 
|
 
)  
where   is the target image and   is the generated image.  
Practically good results were achieved with the following 
ratio of loss terms: 
                           
An Adam optimizer [10] was used to minimize the target 
function with a learning rate of .0002 and beta1 of .5.  
With a batch size of between 1-3 images and number of 
steps of 200000 training was accomplished within ~5-15 
hours on one NVidia Titan Xp GPU. 
Dataset 
The auxiliary dataset consists of ~2800 images of body-
wear from Tommy Hilfiger. The data was augmented by 
combining colour swaps (swapping colour axes), colour 
shifts (replacing all values of a random colour axes to 
255 if information loss does not occur and number of 
unique colours remains the same) and horizontal flips. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Example substrate images 
Figure 7. Example colour shifted substrates 

4. Results 
 
Labrador (green grass/leaves and tree-like structures behind are also considered as a “Labrador”)  
 
Tandem-bike (silhouette of a person/body parts) 
 
Horse-cart (with grass and ground) 
 
Gold-fish (pretty clearly identified) 
 
Toilet seat (with pipes)

Providing gray-scale image to thee VGG part of the model gave even better results due to the decreased adversarial 
effect of trying to generate an object that looks like a body wear: 
 
Different ratios of the optimiser’s targets combined with mixing multiple categories can give interesting results: 
 
Such generators using the architecture described in this paper were able to restore up to 24 categories, with up to 3 
categories mixed together at once. When using a higher number of categories the generator failed to effectively 
reconstruct all of the categories and objects became unrecognizable mixing details of one category with those from 
another.  
Figure 8. Toilet seat (with pipes) 
Figure 9. Aircraft carrier (water/sky 
also considered as an aircraft carrier) 
Figure 10. Cock 
Figure 11. Salamander 
Figure 12. Siamese cat 
Figure 13. Horse-cart 
Figure 14. Train + salamander 
Figure 15. Dog + cat 
Figure 16. Fish + rabbit 
Figure 17.Dog + train + 
goldfish 

In an extension to the method described above, an 
approach similar to GradCam [11] was used to mask 
the regions which activated the VGG classifier the 
most. This alteration provided visually better 
separation between substrate image and the generated 
picture of desired category.  However, it was not 
applicable in the scope of the original project for 
which a smooth merge between the substrate and 
generated category was required.  Such a masking is 
definitely advised for achieving better results when 
reconstructing the training distribution. 
5. Conclusion 
When applying such architectures over a classifier, a 
sample 
of 
the 
training 
distribution 
can 
be 
reconstructed.  This approach opens up a host of 
possible vulnerabilities for image recognition models, 
some with serious consequences.  Examples include 
any system that is used for authorisation purposes 
could be exploited or a model trained on sensitive or 
private data could be opened up for public access. 
At the same time the described approach can be used 
to visualize the capabilities of image classifiers and 
analyse redundancy within the models. On the 
samples above it can be clearly seen, that VGG16 is 
being activated on artefacts that do not have a direct 
relation to the predicted category.  The “Labrador” 
category also reproduced trees and in the “Horse-
Cart” category, grass and other details around the 
horse can be observed.  This shows the redundancy of 
the classifier itself and/or not optimal training set. 
We believe that the model is able to reconstruct the 
training distribution when using an auxiliary dataset 
that is far from the training distribution, due to the 
fact, that Conditional GAN is used.  The conditional 
GAN only determines whether or not the generated 
image looks like a photo of an actual object from a 
“real” world.  However, this is also a restriction of the 
approach, the auxiliary dataset should consist of 
images containing the style we would like to inherit in 
the generated object.  It was known that VGG was 
trained on photos and so it was possible to reconstruct 
samples from the training set of VGG, using an 
auxiliary dataset also containing photos. 
Investigation into the use of auxiliary datasets with 
different distributions and using different classifiers is 
an avenue of further research, which could bring 
greater understanding to this problem. 
6. Supplementary Material 
The architecture was extended to be able to output 
images of size of 1024x1024 and optimised the 
objective function in such a way, that ImageNet 
category can be clearly seen on each generated 
picture.  However,      confidence of the image 
classifier was not required so as to balance the      
and      loss which resulted in more visually 
pleasing patterns.  It was also required that any 
random crop should contain a wanted category, 
forcing a model to generate more pattern-like outputs 
rather than a picture of some certain object. 
 
 
Figure 18. Snake 
Figure 19. Parrot 
Figure 20. Turtle 
Figure 21. Flamingo 

 
 
7. References 
 
[1]  K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep 
convolutional networks for large-scale image 
recognition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556., 
2014.  
[2]  A. Nguyen, J. Yosinski and J. Clune, “Deep 
neural networks are easily fooled: High 
confidence predictions for unrecognizable 
images,” Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on 
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 
427-436, 2015.  
[3]  A. Chattopadhyay, A. Sarkar, P. Howlader and 
V. Balasubramanian, “Grad-CAM++: 
Generalized Gradient-based Visual Explanations 
for Deep Convolutional Networks,” arXiv 
preprint arXiv:1710.11063., 2017.  
[4]  I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. 
Xu, D. Warde-Farley, S. Ozair, A. Courville and 
Y. Bengio, “Generative adversarial nets,” 
Advances in neural information processing 
systems , pp. 2672-2680, 2014.  
[5]  K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren and J. Sun, “Delving 
deep into rectifiers: Surpassing human-level 
performance on imagenet classification,” 
Proceedings of the IEEE international 
conference on computer vision, pp. 1026-1034, 
2015.  
Figure 22. Bee 
Figure 23. Hamster 
Figure 24. Panda (even without 
requirement of 100% confidence 
tree is clearly seen by VGG16 as 
part of “panda” category) 
Figure 25. Jaguar 
Figure 26. Cock 
Figure 27. Zebra 

[6]  O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer and T. Brox, “U-net: 
Convolutional networks for biomedical image 
segmentation,” International Conference on 
Medical Image Computing and Computer-
Assisted Intervention, pp. 234-241, 2015.  
[7]  S. Xiang and H. Li, “On the Effects of Batch and 
Weight Normalization in Generative Adversarial 
Networks,” stat, no. 1050, p. 22, 2017.  
[8]  C. Li and M. Wand, “Precomputed real-time 
texture synthesis with markovian generative 
adversarial networks,” European Conference on 
Computer Vision, pp. 702-716, 2016.  
[9]  P. Isola, J. Zhu, T. Zhou and A. Efros, “Image-to-
image translation with conditional adversarial 
networks,” arXiv preprint, no. arXiv:1611.07004, 
2016.  
[10] D. Kingma and J. Ba, “A method for stochastic 
optimization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 
2014.  
[11] R. R. Selvaraju, M. Cogswell, A. Das, R. 
Vedantam, D. Parikh and D. Batra, “Grad-CAM: 
Visual Explanations from Deep Networks via 
Gradient-based Localization,” https://arxiv. 
org/abs/1610.02391 v3., 2016.  
[12] H. Chen, H. Zhang, P. Y. Chen, J. Yi and C. J. 
Hsieh, “Show-and-Fool: Crafting Adversarial 
Examples for Neural Image Captioning,” arXiv 
preprint arXiv:1712.02051, 2017.
