Citation: Maksymov, I.S. Physical
Reservoir Computing Enabled by
Solitary Waves and
Biologically-Inspired Nonlinear
Transformation of Input Data.
Preprints XXXX, 1, 0. https://doi.org/
(https://
xxx
xxx/).
Article
Physical Reservoir Computing Enabled by Solitary Waves and
Biologically-Inspired Nonlinear Transformation of Input Data
Ivan S. Maksymov
Artificial Intelligence and Cyber Futures Institute, Charles Sturt University, Bathurst, NSW 2795, Australia;

Abstract: Reservoir computing (RC) systems can efficiently forecast chaotic time series using nonlinear
dynamical properties of an artificial neural network of random connections. The versatility of RC
systems has motivated further research on both hardware counterparts of traditional RC algorithms
and more efficient RC-like schemes. Inspired by the nonlinear processes in a living biological
brain and using solitary waves excited on the surface of a flowing liquid film, in this paper we
experimentally validate a physical RC system that substitutes the effect of randomness for a nonlinear
transformation of input data. Carrying out all operations using a microcontroller with a minimal
computational power, we demonstrate that the so-designed RC system serves as a technically simple
hardware counterpart to the ‘next-generation’ improvement of the traditional RC algorithm.
Keywords: artificial intelligence; chaotic time series; fluid dynamics; nonlinear dynamics; reservoir
computing; solitary waves.
1. Introduction
A biological brain is a dynamical system characterised by a complex nonlinear and
chaotic behaviour at multiple levels [1–3]. For example, recent theoretical and experimental
works have demonstrated that a nerve fibre can operate as a nonlinear waveguide for
hybrid electro-acousto-mechanical nerve pulses [4–9]. In particular, it has been shown
that an interplay between the nonlinearity of the nerve fibres and dispersion processes
occurring in them results in the formation and propagation of solitary waves [5,6].
It is also well-known that a biological brain can intrinsically process nonlinear acoustic
signals such as natural sounds and music [10–14]. For example, if a human is exposed to
a sound with the spectrum that has all of the acoustic frequency components except the
fundamental harmonic, their brain restores the missing frequencies automatically. This
phenomenon is called restoration of the missing fundamental [15].
In an experiment involving tests of the auditory system of barn owls [16], electrodes
were introduced into the animal’s brain and the owl listened to a version of Strauss’s ‘The
Blue Danube’ made up of tones from which the fundamental frequency had been removed.
The researchers hypothesised that, if the missing fundamental harmonic was restored at
early levels of auditory processing, neurons in the owl’s brain would fire at the rate of the
missing fundamental. The experiment confirmed their assumption: the electric output of
the electrodes was amplified and played through a loudspeaker, resulting in the original
melody of ’The Blue Danube’.
While the biophysical origin of the restoration of the missing fundamental continues to
be a subject of debate, it has been suggested that it can be explained by nonlinear and chaotic
effects [17]. Nonlinear processes in biological neural systems have also motivated research
on artificial neural networks that exploit nonlinear properties of diverse mathematical
models and physical systems [18–29].
Inspired by the natural nonlinear processes in a living biological brain and following
the recent advances in the field of reservoir computing (RC)—machine learning algorithms
for prediction of nonlinear and chaotic time series [30–32]—in this paper we experimentally
validate a physical RC system that exploits nonlinear dynamical properties of solitary-like
(SL) waves excited on the surface of a flowing liquid film. The resulting neuromorphic
arXiv:2402.03319v1  [cs.NE]  3 Jan 2024

2 of 15
Figure 1. Schematic representation of (a) a traditional algorithmic RC system and (b) an RC system
with a reservoir of random connection substituted by a nonlinear functional of the input data.
computer mimics the functionality of a biological neuron in terms of effectively represent-
ing and processing input signals as nonlinear functionals. Yet, it serves as a hardware
counterpart to a computationally efficient modification of the traditional RC algorithm
called the next generation reservoir computing [33].
We build and test a technically simple prototype of the proposed physical RC system
employing an inexpensive Arduino microcontroller. While the microcontroller has a mini-
mal computational power but the total cost of the prototype does not exceed USD$100, we
argue that in certain practical situations the efficiency of the physical RC system may exceed
the one of optimised machine learning software run on a high-performance workstation.
This paper is organised as follows. In Section 2, we survey the traditional and next gen-
eration RC algorithms as well as overview the recent advances in the field of soliton-based
RC systems and adjacent technologies, including analogue and neuromorphic computers
based on nonlinear dynamics of fluids. The technical aspects of the experimental setup
used in this work are presented in Section 3. The main results of this paper are presented in
Section 4 followed by a general discussion in Section 5.
2. State-of-the-art
2.1. Traditional Reservoir Computing Algorithm
The traditional RC algorithm stems from two independently developed neural net-
work architectures known as Echo State Network (ESN, see Figure 1a) [34] and Liquid
State Machine (LSM) [18]. A neural network architecture similar to ESN and LSM was also
proposed in an earlier work [35] that went mostly unnoticed [36,37].
A typical RC procedure consists of the following computational steps [30], where n is
the index denoting equally-spaced discrete time instances tn:
1.
Create a vector un of Nu input values;
2.
Use a random number generator to define an input matrix Win consisting of Nx × Nu
elements and a recurrent weight matrix W containing Nx × Nx elements;

3 of 15
3.
Calculate the spectral radius and normalise Win (see [30,38] for details);
4.
Compute a vector xn of Nx neural activations as
xn = (1 −α)xn−1 + α tanh(Winun + Wxn−1) ,
(1)
where hyperparameter α ∈(0, 1] controls the update speed of the temporal dynamics;
5.
Construct the state matrix X using the values of xn;
6.
Train the output as Wout = YtargetX⊤(XX⊤+ βI)−1, where I is the identity matrix, β is
a regularisation coefficient, X⊤is the transpose of X and Ytarget is matrix composed of
target outputs ytarget
n
for each time instant tn;
7.
Solve Eq. (1) with a new set of target data un and compute the output vector as
yn = Wout[1; un; xn].
The computations in Step 7 can be organised differently depending on the particular
problem under consideration [38]. In the predictive regime (also known as the one-step
ahead prediction), Eq. (1) is solved for the target data that were not previously seen by the
RC system. However, in the generative regime (also known as the free-running forecast),
Eq. (1) is solved for an updated target data set given by the output generated by the same
RC system at the previous time step (i.e. xn is calculated using Eq. (1) with un = yn−1).
It is noteworthy that the demonstration of correct operation in the generative mode
is a more challenging task compared with the operation in the predictive mode and other
regimes where the RC system has access to the expected target data. The same applies to
various classification tasks and computational tasks that involve target data that correspond
to time-delayed training datasets [39]. On the contrary, in the generative regime the RC
system does not know the expected outcome (however, these data can be known to a human
operator who is tasked to evaluate the accuracy of predictions made by the RC system
[38,40]). In this context, in the case of the traditional RC algorithm, the operation in the
generative mode can be compromised by a spurious data point produced by the RC system
[38]. While a number of techniques aimed to improve the generative mode performance of
algorithmic RC system have been proposed in the literature [38,41], the ability of physical
RC systems to operate in the generative mode has been difficult to achieve [40,42,43]. In
the following, we will demonstrate a possibility to create an efficient physical RC system
operating in the generative mode.
2.2. Next Generation Algorithmic Reservoir Computing
In the paper [33], an alternative RC algorithm was proposed where the state matrix
X of the traditional RC system was substituted by a matrix Xf uture consisting of future
states xf uture
n
corresponding to the current and time-delayed discrete input data points
un and their nonlinear functionals (for a schematic depiction of such an approach see
Figure 1b). The so-constructed state matrix was then used to calculate Wout, thereby
avoiding the computationally demanding Steps 2–4 of the calculation procedure outlined
in the previous section. Importantly, based on the results presented in Ref. [44], it was also
demonstrated that the resulting computational scheme does not only circumvent using
matrices of randomly-generated neural connections but is equivalent to and even more
computationally efficient than the traditional RC algorithm. This approach was called the
next generation reservoir computing [33,45–48]. Similar algorithms that further improve
the performance of RC systems have also been proposed [49].
The nonlinear part of the future states xf uture
n
can be an arbitrary nonlinear function
of the input signal. In Ref. [33], accurate forecasts were made using polynomials. It was
also established that it suffices to retain just a few polynomial orders to obtain accurate
results. A similar result was obtained in Ref. [50] in the context of quantum reservoir
computing, where the authors implemented a nonlinear transformation on the input
data, demonstrating that further data processing as per the traditional RC algorithm was
redundant.

4 of 15
It is noteworthy that a nonlinear functional of the input data can also be obtained
using a physical dynamical system. For example, in Ref. [40] a chaotic times series was used
as a signal that drives nonlinear oscillations of gas bubbles trapped in a liquid. Sinusoidal
waves are known to be the fundamental excitations that define the dynamics of many
nonlinear systems [51]. In the case of a cluster of bubbles in water, the excitation with
a purely sinusoidal wave results in the generation of signals that contain higher order
harmonics of the fundamental frequency. This property was used to create a physical
analogue of a traditional RC system that approximates a chaotic time series using a large
number of sinusoidal waves with different frequencies and amplitudes.
2.3. Physical Reservoir Computing Systems Based on Solitary Waves
Since the traditional RC approach employs the nonlinear dynamics of the mathematical
system Eq. (1), it was demonstrated that a practicable reservoir could be constructed using a
hardware dynamical system [30,31]. Known as the physical RC technique, this approach to
computations has been successfully validated, both theoretically and experimentally, result-
ing in the physical RC systems based on spintronic devices [52,53], quantum-mechanical
systems [39,54,55], electronic circuits [31,56], photonic systems [31,42,57], mechanical de-
vices [58] and liquids [37,59–61].
It is also well-known that the architectures of some analogue computers used in the
20th century exploited nonlinear dynamical properties of liquids [37,62,63] (e.g. Ishiguro
computer was based on the fundamental nonlinear physical processes that govern the dy-
namics of solitary and tsunami waves). Consequently, both due to the prior knowledge and
independently, there have been proposals of physical RC systems based on the dynamics
of solitary waves [37,43,61,63–68].
Solitary waves propagate with a constant velocity and self-maintain their shape due to
an interplay between dispersive processes and nonlinear effects in the medium where they
exist [69]. Solitary-like (SL) surface waves that originate from spatio-temporal evolution
of flowing liquid films are a particular class of solitary waves known in the field of fluid
dynamics (for a review see, e.g., [70,71]). Whereas SL waves are similar to other kinds
of solitary waves, they possess a number of unique futures [72]. For instance, unlike
two Korteweg-de Vries (KdV) solitary waves that can pass through each other without
significant change [73], two SL waves can merge leading to a more complex behaviour [72].
The dynamics of both KdV [61] and SL [43] waves have been shown to be valuable for
creating a computational reservoir. In the following, we demonstrate that the specific non-
linear properties of SL waves offer an additional degree of freedom to control the dynamics
of the reservoir and help reduce the computational effort while generally reproducing the
operation of the traditional RC algorithm.
3. Experimental Setup
Figure 2 shows the experimental setup of the proposed RC system that uses tap water
as the operating liquid. The experiment was designed so that the setup enabled both studies
of a prototype of the RC system and investigations of the fundamental physical properties of
SL waves. In the studies of the RC system, the SL waves were detected using a customised
red laser diode-photodetector pair. To better understand the physical properties of SL
waves, an organic fluorescent dye was dissolved in water and the liquid was illuminated
with UV light. A high-speed digital camera was used to record the fluorescence images
(Figure 2b). The addition of the fluorescent dye did not change the fluid-mechanical
properties of the liquid nor it noticeably the operation of the photodetector.
The SL waves were excited on the surface of a liquid film flowing along an elongated
metal plate inclined with respect to the ground by the angle θ = 3 o [70]. To control the SL
waves, the flow rate of the liquid was varied using a miniature electric pump. The electric
signal that powered the pump corresponded to the input values un in the algorithmic RC
system. To match the temporal dynamics of the input signal with the temporal dynamics
of the SL waves, that signal was downsampled so that the fundamental frequency in its

5 of 15
Figure 2. (a) Sketch and (b) top view fluorescence photograph of the experimental setup used to
validate the proposed architecture of the physical RC system. The fluorescent dye, UV light and
digital camera play an auxiliary role and can be removed from the setup without compromising its
operation. The remaining components of the setup are controlled by an Arduino microcontroller that
is also used to process the raw data traces.
spectrum was 1–2 Hz depending on the particular experimental scenario. The so-controlled
pump enabled a smooth variation in the amplitude of the created SL waves.
All components of the setup were controlled by an Arduino UNO R3 microcontroller
(16 MHz clock speed, 2 kB RAM) running customised software. The same microcontroller
was used to process raw experimental data traces and produce the final results. A personal
computer was used only to produce the figures presented in this paper.
4. Results
4.1. Formation of the Nonlinear Functional
The nonlinear transformation of the input data implemented in the RC system pro-
posed in this work is illustrated in Figure 1b. To experimentally validate this approach, we
choose a simple but non-trivial test problem [74] of prediction of the future evolution of
a sinusoidal wave. In the framework of our experiment, this scenario corresponds to the
excitation of SL waves using the pump that is driven by a 1 Hz sinusoidal electric signal.
As shown in Figure 3a, each period of the sinusoidal wave triggers the generation of
an SL wave (also see Supplementary Video 1). Each SL wave consists of a main pulse with
a steep front that is preceded by a train of secondary pulses of a smaller amplitude [70,72].
When an SL wave moves downstream, the photodetector first receives the light reflected
from the secondary pulses and then it senses the main pulse. As a result, in Figure 3a we
observe a reversed picture: the train of low-amplitude secondary pulses precedes the main
pulse.
We compute the Fourier spectra of both sinusoidal and SL wave signals and plot them
in Figure 3b. We can see that the spectrum of the SL waves is composed of the fundamental
(1 Hz) frequency peak and the peaks that correspond to the second, third, fourth and so
on higher-order harmonics. The spectrum of the sinusoidal wave has only one frequency

6 of 15
Figure 3. (a) Input sinusoidal signal (the dotted curve) and the SL waves excited by it (the solid
curve). (b) Fourier spectra of the signals in Panel (a). (c) Free-running forecast of the future evolution
of the sinusoidal waves made by the RC system based on the SL waves. Note that the timescale in
Panel (c) is unrelated to that in Panel (a).
peak at 1 Hz. Thus, we can see that the SL waves effectively represent the input signal as a
nonlinear polynomial function.
Empirically, the nonlinear generation of the higher-order harmonic frequency peaks in
Figure 3b can be explained drawing an analogy between the steep front of the main pulse of
the SL waves and large-amplitude shock-like acoustic disturbances [70,75]. Shock waves are
known to have a frequency spectrum composed of a large number of higher-order harmonic
frequencies [76]. A mathematical insight into the nonlinear transformation process can
also be gained analysing nonlinear partial differential equations that approximate complex
nonlinear physical phenomena [77].
We use the SL wave signal as the vector xn of neural activations of the traditional
RC algorithm (Figure 1a). Importantly, although in other physical RC systems the output
of the physical reservoir is also often interpreted as a vector xn (see, e.g., [37,53]), in our
SL-wave based RC system the vector xn contains the values that are both time-delayed and
a nonlinear function of the input data. Subsequently, this vector is conceptually similar to
a future vector used in the next generation RC algorithm [33]. Moreover, while only the
quadratic nonlinear term was retained in Ref. [33] to reduce the computational effort, the
use of SL waves enables us to retain many nonlinear terms as shown in Figure 3b.
Yet, unlike the original next generation RC algorithm [33] and it modifications, in
our RC system the vector xn is constructed only once as part of the training stage and it
is not updated at the exploitation stage. That is, our algorithm does not follow Step 7 in
the traditional RC scheme where Eq. (1) needs to be solved. This simplification aligns with
the demonstrations of the primary role of the nonlinear transformation of the input data in
Ref. [40,50] and it is discussed in more detail in the next subsection.
Figure 3c shows the results of the free-running forecast (generative mode) made by
the SL wave physical RC system using the procedure described above. We can see that the
RC system correctly predicts the future evolution of the sinusoidal wave. We also note that
this result was obtained with a minimum post-processing, involving only the removal of
the DC component of the output signal.

7 of 15
Figure 4. Input MGTS signal (the dotted curve) and the SL waves excited by it (the solid curve).
Unlike in Figure 3a, since each variation of MGTS results in the generation of SL waves with different
amplitude and propagation speed, the SL waves collide and form more complex wave profiles.
4.2. Advantages for Generative Mode Operation
Before we test the physical RC system on a more challenging task of chaotic time
series prediction, we discuss one particular advantage of the neuromorphic computation
approach introduced in the previous section—making a forecast using neural activations
xn constructed at the training stage.
In the generative regime, the implementation of Step 7 of the computational procedure
outlined in Section 2.1 corresponds to the introduction of a feedback loop from the output
of the RC system to its input. Subsequently, the reservoir can be considered to be a self-
oscillator [78], which is an established fact [79].
Self-oscillations have been obtained in diverse physical system and mathematical
models that involve an oscillator that uses its own output signal to modulate the phase of
the external driving force. The so-constructed system can maintain a periodic motion using
a source of power that lacks periodicity [78].
We demonstrate that the introduction of a feedback can be avoided without compro-
mising the operation of the RC system. This approach is based on the following facts.
A key component of the operation of a trained reservoir is the matrix Wout that remains
unchanged at the exploitation stage and is used to make a forecast as yn = Wout[1; un; xn].
From the physical point of view, the chief role of the feedback loop is the maintenance of
an appropriate temporal dynamics of the reservoir.
We established that an RC system can produce plausible results when the reservoir
is driven by a signal that is similar to the training dataset in terms of temporal dynamics
and magnitude. We successfully tested signals corresponding to a delayed version of the
training and synthetic signals corresponding to a sum of sinusoidal waves with different
frequencies and amplitudes (for a relevant discussion see [40]). Thus, provided that the
dynamics of the reservoir is maintained with an appropriate rate and amplitude, by virtue
of the values of Wout the reservoir can produce feasible results.
This finding is especially useful in the case of physical RC systems. Indeed, the
introduction of a feedback loop in a computer code that implements the traditional RC
algorithm does not present significant technical difficulties [38]. However, in physical
RC systems where the dynamics of the reservoir is controlled by an electronic, optical
or opto-electronic circuit [42,57], apart from certain technical limitations a feedback loop
introduces a time delay [42]. Such a delay can be longer than the timescale of the reservoir
dynamics and it can interrupt the dynamics of the reservoir, requiring the application
of complex experimental techniques aimed to restore the intended reservoir dynamics
[42]. (We also confirmed that the introduction of an artificial delay in the traditional RC
algorithm compromises the operation of the reservoir.)
Hence, the technical simplification proposed in this paper enables the developers of
physical RC systems to avoid the use of feedback loops, also simplifying the design of the
device and decreasing its cost. While any simplification comes at a cost, in the following
we demonstrate that our physical RC system can undertake complex tasks, producing
practicable forecasts.

8 of 15
Figure 5. Generative mode operation (free-running forecast) of (a) physical RC system based on SL
waves and (b) traditional algorithmic RC system (the solid curve) compared with the target MGTS
(the dotted curve). (c) Modulus of absolute error of the forecasts produced by the physical and
traditional RC algorithmic systems. Note that for the sake of comparison the error of the traditional
RC system is plotted with the negative sign.
4.3. Free-running Forecast of Chaotic Time Series
As a next step, we demonstrate the ability of the physical RC system based on SL
waves to predict a Mackey-Glass time series (MGTS), which is a standard test problem
used to verify the accuracy of neural network models [38,80,81]. While other chaotic time
series [33,82–85] have been employed to test both algorithmic and physical RC system, in
our previous work [40] we demonstrated that, due to the complexity of the Mackey-Glass
model, it suffices to test an RC system using MGTS to reasonably expect that the same RC
system will be able to process other time series with acceptable accuracy.
We generate an MGTS dataset solving the delay differential equation [86]
˙xMG(t)
=
βMG
xMG(τMG −t)
1 + xq
MG(τMG −t) −γMGxMG(t) ,
(2)
where overdot denotes differentiation with respect to time and τMG = 17, q = 10, βMG = 0.2
and γMG = 0.1 [38]. Then we split the resulting dataset into two parts. The first part that
corresponds to a few (typically 5–6) pseudo-periods of variation of MGTS is used to train
the RC system. The longer second part is used as the target data that are not known to
the RC system but used exclusively to evaluate the accuracy of the forecast made by the
RC system in the generative regime. We underscore that this approach differs from the
standard one where the training and target datasets have the same length, showing that
shorter training datasets can be used to train the RC system based on SL waves.
Unlike the SL waves produced by each period of the sinusoidal signal in Figure 3a,
the SL waves produced by each oscillation in the MGTS signal have different shapes and
amplitudes (Figure 4; for a theoretical analysis see Ref. [43]). As demonstrated in Refs. [70,
71], the SL waves of different amplitude have different propagation speeds. Previously
we demonstrated that this physical property enables the SL waves to interact one with
another, resulting in a complex nonlinear dynamical behaviour that is suitable for creating
a computational reservoir with a short-term memory [43].

9 of 15
The free-running forecast made by the physical RC system is presented in Figure 5a.
In Figure 5b we also plot the free-running forecast made by the traditional algorithmic RC
system implemented following the algorithm presented in Ref. [38]. Both systems were
trained and tested on the same training and test datasets, respectively.
It is noteworthy that the traditional RC system requires a much longer training dataset
compared with the one needed for the physical RC system. Therefore, in the particular
example shown in Figure 5a, b, the length of the training dataset was increased to enable the
traditional RC system to make a meaningful forecast (i.e., unlike the algorithmic RC system,
the physical RC system can operate using shorter training datasets, which is a property that
was previously observed mostly in quantum RC systems [39]). We also established that,
firstly, the traditional RC system requires a reservoir with at least 1000 neurons to produce
an interpretable result and, secondly, any further increase in the number of neurons leads
to overtraining of the reservoir (the so-called overfitting condition [30]), rendering the RC
system unable to reproduce the dynamics of the target time series.
Thus, we can see that the forecast made by the physical RC system reasonably captures
the long-term variation of MGTS in general. Yet, overall, the accuracy of the forecast made
by the physical RC is higher than that of the traditional RC algorithm (Figure 5c). We
emphasise that in this test the traditional RC system used 1000 neurons and its operation re-
quired approximately 2 seconds of CPU time of a high-performance workstation computer
(Mac Studio M1, Ultra 20-core CPU, 128 GB RAM).
This analysis made above reflects the well-known fact that, after a certain threshold,
any further increase in the size of a computational reservoir results in a small, if any,
increase in the performance [32]. The physical RC system presented in this work does
suffer from this drawback since it does not rely on random matrices used in the traditional
RC algorithm.
The problem of saturation of the reservoir size also does not exist in the framework of
the next generation RC algorithm [33]. However, software that implements it also requires
a modern computer. Yet, the computational effort associated with the next generation RC
computations increases as the nonlinear functional of the input data becomes a higher-order
polynomial compared with a quadratic functional used in Ref. [33]. On the contrary, the
physical RC system based on SL waves automatically represents the input data using many
higher-order nonlinear harmonics and, therefore, does not require any further adjustment
of the input datasets.
5. Discussion
5.1. Energy Efficiency, Power Consumption and Cost
Thus, while a high-accuracy long-term forecast of MGTS using a traditional RC al-
gorithm requires a high-performance workstation, the result in Figure 5b was obtained
using a rather modest auxiliary computational power of an Arduino microcontroller (Ar-
duino microcontrollers used in the previous demonstration of physical RC systems [87]
were not employed to post-process data). Indeed, employing floating point operations
per second (FLOPS) as a unit of measure, we estimate the maximum performance of the
Arduino microcontroller used in this work to be of order of 0.1 MFLOPS. For comparison,
the workstation computer used to test the traditional RC system can readily deliver more
than 2 TFLOPS. Furthermore, the Arduino microcontroller has just 2 kB RAM compared
with a 128 GB RAM of the workstation and the entire experimental setup shown in Figure 2
consumes less than 1 W of power compared with a more than 200 W power consumption
by the workstation.
While, in principle, less powerful workstation models can be used instead of the
workstation used in this paper, the cost of a computer with a minimal specification needed
to run the software that implements the traditional RC algorithm is around USD$1,000 but
the power consumed by it is about 50 W. On the contrary, the cost of the prototype of the
physical RC system is just USD$100.

10 of 15
To put the cost and power consumption of the physical RC system further into per-
spective, we note that the price of a mass-produced AkidaTM PCIe Board with a BrainChip
neuromorphic processor is USD$499 but an assembled ‘Development Kit’ system based on
a personal computer costs USD$9,995 and consumes 180 W [88]. Generally speaking, in
light of an exponential increase in the computing power demand seen in the last decade [89],
the liquid-based unconventional computing system appears to be a plausible alternative to
conventional microelectronics [90]. Unconventional liquid-state computational systems can
also outperform emergent photonics-based computers [91] in terms of energy efficiency
since the latter may require high-intensity laser light to induce nonlinear effects needed for
a physical implementation of a neural network [64] but nonlinear processes in liquids can
be obtained virtually effortlessly [76].
5.2. Potential Applications
Admittedly, the accuracy of the free-running forecast made by the physical RC system
may not be suitable for quantitative analysis such as mathematical modelling of financial
markets. Nevertheless, a number of works demonstrated a high value of qualitative
forecasts of variation of financial markets [92,93], which is a finding that aligns with the
scope of financial physics, an academic discipline that studies financial markets as physical
systems, thus complementing quantitative finance by elucidating the physical nature of
financial nonlinear dynamical processes [94].
However, the main advantage of the proposed physical RC system does not necessarily
come from its comparison with the computational algorithms used in quantitative research.
In fact, the concept of reservoir computing has been applied to study neural information
processing in biological brain networks [18,95–98] where the requirement for an RC system
to make quantitatively exact forecasts can be relaxed. On the other hand, it is mandatory
that the RC system operates similarly to a biological brain. Importantly, this requirement
does not only mean a functional resemblance to a brain but also implies a brain-like energy
efficiency [98]. Yet, since it has been suggested that a healthy biological brain relies on non-
randomness of neural connections (i.e. randomness may be associated with some disorders
of the nervous system) [99], an RC system that does not use random matrices should serve
as a better model of biological neural networks than a traditional RC algorithm.
In this context, the physical RC system based on SL waves has certain advantages.
Indeed, firstly, the physical RC system does not rely on randomness. Secondly, as discussed
in the Introduction, the nonlinearity of SL waves employed in the RC system is physically
similar to the nonlinear processes in the nervous system. Thirdly, the physical system is
both computationally and energy efficient. Fourthly, it is conceivable that SL waves or
other types of solitary waves [6] could be used to create an artificial neuron. The research
work in this direction is going on both from the biophysical and chemical [90] and machine
learning [95–97] points of view.
It is also noteworthy that biological environments represent significant technological
challenges for the developers of implantable brain-computer interfaces and other AI-based
system intended co-operate with the nervous system of a living organism [100]. These
challenges include the impact of various physical processes such as vibrations, scattering
and absorption. Previously, we established that SL waves are highly immune to external
mechanical vibrations at the frequencies from 20 to 100 Hz [70]. Therefore, the RC system
based on SL waves can also operate in noisy environments. Yet, its ability to make forecast
should not be affected by strong magnetic and electromagnetic fields, which is, for example,
a technological challenge for spin-wave-based neuromorphic computers [53,101,102].
Finally, the fields of creative music composition and manipulation of sound [103] can
also benefit from the experimental techniques employed in proposed physical RC system.
For example, one can use the experimental setup involving SL waves excited on the surface
of a flowing liquid to create artistic music effects [104]. This intriguing application returns
us to the discussion of nonlinear effects associated with our perception of sound and

11 of 15
music (see the Introduction), thereby demonstrating a fundamental link between nonlinear
dynamics, natural intelligence and AI.
6. Conclusions
We have demonstrated an experimental physical RC system that employs solitary
waves to implement a biologically-inspired nonlinear transformation of input data instead
of large matrices of random neural connections that are central to the traditional RC algo-
rithm. Post-processing raw experimental data using a technically simple and inexpensive
Arduino microcontroller, we built a practicable neuromorphic computer that costs less than
USD$100 and consumes very small electric power compared with both standard digital
computers and many commercial and experimental neuromorphic systems that employ
electron and photonic devices to mimic the neurons.
While feasible fluidic microprocessors have been demonstrated [105] thus paving
the way for further optimisation, miniaturisation and eventual commercialisation of the
physical RC system demonstrated in this paper, we foresee the application of the ideas
proposed in this work in neuromorphic systems designed to closely resemble a biological
neuron [106]. Indeed, since a living organism contains a significant amount of water and,
therefore, can respond to physical stimuli in a nonlinear-dynamical manner [107], it is
plausible that an SL wave based RC system can be implemented as an organic bio-fluid-
based artificial neuron that can communicate with biological neurons to complement and
enhance the natural functionality.
Last but not least, the SL wave-based neuromorphic computing platform is remarkably
technically simple and, at the same time, rich in physical effects. Therefore, it can be both
further explored by scientists and used by high-school and undergraduate students to
understand the principles of neuromorphic computing [108].
Author Contributions: I.S.M. conceived the idea, built the experimental setup, conducted experi-
ments and prepared the manuscript.
Funding: The author did not receive any funding to support this project.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: All data generated in this work are presented in this article.
Acknowledgments: The author acknowledges useful discussions with Dr Abbas Hussein and
Associate Professor Andrey Pototsky.
Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflict of interest.
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
artificial intelligence
AI
direct current
DC
Echo State Network
ESN
floating point operations per second
FLOPS
Korteweg-de Vries
KdV
Liquid State Machine
LSM
Mackey-Glass time series
MGTS
reservoir computing
RC
random access memory
RAM
solitary-like
SL
ultraviolet
UV
United States Dollar
USD

12 of 15
