Adaptive Submodularity: Theory and Applications in Active Learning
and Stochastic Optimization
Daniel Golovin

California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
Andreas Krause

ETH Zurich
8092 Zurich, Switzerland
Abstract
Many problems in artiﬁcial intelligence require adaptively making a sequence of decisions with uncertain
outcomes under partial observability. Solving such stochastic optimization problems is a fundamental but
notoriously difﬁcult challenge. In this paper, we introduce the concept of adaptive submodularity, generalizing
submodular set functions to adaptive policies. We prove that if a problem satisﬁes this property, a simple
adaptive greedy algorithm is guaranteed to be competitive with the optimal policy. In addition to providing
performance guarantees for both stochastic maximization and coverage, adaptive submodularity can be exploited
to drastically speed up the greedy algorithm by using lazy evaluations. We illustrate the usefulness of the concept
by giving several examples of adaptive submodular objectives arising in diverse AI applications including
management of sensing resources, viral marketing and active learning. Proving adaptive submodularity for these
problems allows us to recover existing results in these applications as special cases, improve approximation
guarantees and handle natural generalizations.
Keywords: Adaptive Optimization, Stochastic Optimization, Submodularity, Partial Observability, Active
Learning, Optimal Decision Trees
1. Introduction
In many problems arising in artiﬁcial intelligence one needs to adaptively make a sequence of decisions, taking
into account observations about the outcomes of past decisions. Often these outcomes are uncertain, and
one may only know a probability distribution over them. Finding optimal policies for decision making in
such partially observable stochastic optimization problems is notoriously intractable (see, e.g., Littman et al.
(1998)). A fundamental challenge is to identify classes of planning problems for which simple solutions obtain
(near-) optimal performance.
In this paper, we introduce the concept of adaptive submodularity, and prove that if a partially observable
stochastic optimization problem satisﬁes this property, a simple adaptive greedy algorithm is guaranteed to
obtain near-optimal solutions. In fact, under reasonable complexity-theoretic assumptions, no polynomial time
algorithm is able to obtain better solutions in general. Adaptive submodularity generalizes the classical notion
of submodularity1, which has been successfully used to develop approximation algorithms for a variety of
non-adaptive optimization problems. Submodularity, informally, is an intuitive notion of diminishing returns,
which states that adding an element to a small set helps more than adding that same element to a larger (super-)
set. A celebrated result of the work of Nemhauser et al. (1978) guarantees that for such submodular functions,
a simple greedy algorithm, which adds the element that maximally increases the objective value, selects a
near-optimal set of k elements. Similarly, it is guaranteed to ﬁnd a set of near-minimal cost that achieves a
desired quota of utility (Wolsey, 1982), using near-minimum average time to do so (Streeter and Golovin,
0. This work appeared in the Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research (Golovin and Krause, 2011a), and an eariler extended abstract
appeared in the International Conference on Learning Theory (Golovin and Krause, 2010).
1. For an extensive treatment of submodularity, see the books of Fujishige (2005) and Schrijver (2003).
c⃝2012 Daniel Golovin and Andreas Krause.
arXiv:1003.3967v5  [cs.LG]  6 Dec 2017

2008). Besides guaranteeing theoretical performance bounds, submodularity allows us to speed up algorithms
without loss of solution quality by using lazy evaluations (Minoux, 1978), often leading to performance
improvements of several orders of magnitude (Leskovec et al., 2007). Submodularity has been shown to be
very useful in a variety of problems in artiﬁcial intelligence (Krause and Guestrin, 2009b).
The challenge in generalizing submodularity to adaptive planning — where the action taken in each step
depends on information obtained in the previous steps — is that feasible solutions are now policies (decision
trees or conditional plans) instead of subsets. We propose a natural generalization of the diminishing returns
property for adaptive problems, which reduces to the classical characterization of submodular set functions for
deterministic distributions. We show how these results of Nemhauser et al. (1978), Wolsey (1982), Streeter
and Golovin (2008), and Minoux (1978) generalize to the adaptive setting. Hence, we demonstrate how
adaptive submodular optimization problems enjoy theoretical and practical beneﬁts similar to those of classical,
nonadaptive submodular problems. We further demonstrate the usefulness and generality of the concept by
showing how it captures known results in stochastic optimization and active learning as special cases, admits
tighter performance bounds, leads to natural generalizations and allows us to solve new problems for which no
performance guarantees were known.
As a ﬁrst example, consider the problem of deploying (or controlling) a collection of sensors to monitor
some spatial phenomenon. Each sensor can cover a region depending on its sensing range. Suppose we would
like to ﬁnd the best subset of k locations to place the sensors. In this application, intuitively, adding a sensor
helps more if we have placed few sensors so far and helps less if we have already placed many sensors. We
can formalize this diminishing returns property using the notion of submodularity – the total area covered by
the sensors is a submodular function deﬁned over all sets of locations. Krause and Guestrin (2007) show that
many more realistic utility functions in sensor placement (such as the improvement in prediction accuracy
w.r.t. some probabilistic model) are submodular as well. Now consider the following stochastic variant: Instead
of deploying a ﬁxed set of sensors, we deploy one sensor at a time. With a certain probability, deployed sensors
can fail, and our goal is to maximize the area covered by the functioning sensors. Thus, when deploying the
next sensor, we need to take into account which of the sensors we deployed in the past failed. This problem
has been studied by Asadpour et al. (2008) for the case where each sensor fails independently at random. In
this paper, we show that the coverage objective is adaptive submodular, and use this concept to handle much
more general settings (where, e.g., rather than all-or-nothing failures there are different types of sensor failures
of varying severity). We also consider a related problem where the goal is to place the minimum number of
sensors to achieve the maximum possible sensor coverage (i.e., the coverage obtained by deploying sensors
everywhere), or more generally the goal may be to achieve any ﬁxed percentage of the maximum possible
sensor coverage. Under the ﬁrst goal, the problem is equivalent to one studied by Goemans and Vondr´ak
(2006), and generalizes a problem studied by Liu et al. (2008).
As another example, consider a viral marketing problem, where we are given a social network, and we
want to inﬂuence as many people as possible in the network to buy some product. We do that by giving the
product for free to a subset of the people, and hope that they convince their friends to buy the product as well.
Formally, we have a graph, and each edge e is labeled by a number 0 ≤pe ≤1. We “inﬂuence” a subset
of nodes in the graph, and for each inﬂuenced node, their neighbors get randomly inﬂuenced according to
the probability annotated on the edge connecting the nodes. This process repeats until no further node gets
inﬂuenced. Kempe et al. (2003) show that the set function which quantiﬁes the expected number of nodes
inﬂuenced is submodular. A natural stochastic variant of the problem is where we pick a node, get to see
which nodes it inﬂuenced, then adaptively pick the next node based on these observations and so on. We show
that a large class of such adaptive inﬂuence maximization problems satisﬁes adaptive submodularity.
Our third application is in active learning, where we are given an unlabeled data set, and we would like
to adaptively pick a small set of examples whose labels imply all other labels. The same problem arises in
automated diagnosis, where we have hypotheses about the state of the system (e.g., what illness a patient has),
and would like to perform tests to identify the correct hypothesis. In both domains we want to pick examples /
tests to shrink the remaining version space (the set of consistent hypotheses) as quickly as possible. Here, we
show that the reduction in version space probability mass is adaptive submodular, and use that observation
to prove that the adaptive greedy algorithm is a near-optimal querying policy. Our results for active learning
2

Name
New Results
Location
A.S. Maximization
Tight (1 −1/e)-approx. for A.M.S. objectives
§5.1, page 10
A.S. Min Cost Coverage
Squared logarithmic approx. for A.M.S. objectives
§5.2, page 12
A.S. Min Sum Cover
Tight 4-approx. for A.M.S. objectives
§5.3, page 15
Data Dependent Bounds
Generalization to A.M.S. functions
§5.1, page 10
Accelerated Greedy
Generalization of lazy evaluations to the adaptive setting
§4, page 9
Stochastic
Submodular
Maximization
Generalization of the previous (1 −1/e)-approx. to arbitrary
per–item set distributions, and to item costs
§6, page 16
Stochastic Set Cover
(ln(n) + 1)2-approx. for arbitrary per-item set distributions,
with item costs
§7, page 18
Adaptive Viral Marketing
Adaptive analog of previous (1−1/e)-approx. for non-adaptive
viral marketing, under more general reward functions; squared
logarithmic approx. for the adaptive min cost cover version
§8, page 20
Active Learning
New analysis for generalized binary search and its approximate
versions with and without item costs
§9, page 24
Hardness in the absence of
Adapt. Submodularity
Ω(|E|1−ϵ)-approximation hardness for A.S. Maximization,
Min Cost Coverage, and Min-Sum Cover, if f is not adaptive
submodular.
§12, page 33
Table 1: Summary of our theoretical results. A.S. is shorthand for “adaptive stochastic”, and A.M.S. is
shorthand for “adaptive monotone submodular.”
and automated diagnosis are also related to recent results of Guillory and Bilmes (2010, 2011) who study
generalizations of submodular set cover to an interactive setting. In contrast to our approach however, Guillory
and Bilmes analyze worst-case costs, and use rather different technical deﬁnitions and proof techniques.
We summarize our main contributions below, and provide a more technical summary in Table 1. At a high
level, our main contributions are:
• We consider a particular class of partially observable adaptive stochastic optimization problems, which
we prove to be hard to approximate in general.
• We introduce the concept of adaptive submodularity, and prove that if a problem instance satisﬁes
this property, a simple adaptive greedy policy performs near-optimally, for both adaptive stochastic
maximization and coverage, and also a natural min-sum objective.
• We show how adaptive submodularity can be exploited by allowing the use of an accelerated adaptive
greedy algorithm using lazy evaluations, and how we can obtain data-dependent bounds on the optimum.
• We illustrate adaptive submodularity on several realistic problems, including Stochastic Maximum
Coverage, Stochastic Submodular Coverage, Adaptive Viral Marketing, and Active Learning. For these
applications, adaptive submodularity allows us to recover known results and prove natural generaliza-
tions.
1.1 Organization
This article is organized as follows. In §2 (page 4) we set up notation and formally deﬁne the relevant adaptive
optimization problems for general objective functions. For the reader’s convenience, we have also provided
a reference table of important symbols on page 58. In §3 (page 6) we review the classical notion of submod-
ularity and introduce the novel adaptive submodularity property. In §4 (page 9) we introduce the adaptive
greedy policy, as well as an accelerated variant. In §5 (page 10) we discuss the theoretical guarantees that
the adaptive greedy policy enjoys when applied to problems with adaptive submodular objectives. Sections 6
through 9 provide examples on how to apply the adaptive submodular framework to various applications,
3

namely Stochastic Submodular Maximization (§6, page 16), Stochastic Submodular Coverage (§7, page 18),
Adaptive Viral Marketing (§8, page 20), and Active Learning (§9, page 24). In §10 (page 29) we report
empirical results on two sensor selection problems. In §11 (page 31) we discuss the adaptivity gap of the
problems we consider, and in §12 (page 33) we prove hardness results indicating that problems which are not
adaptive submodular can be extremely inapproximable under reasonable complexity assumptions. We review
related work in §13 (page 34) and provide concluding remarks in §14 (page 36). The Appendix (page 41)
gives details of how to incorporate item costs and includes all of the proofs omitted from the main text.
2. Adaptive Stochastic Optimization
We start by introducing notation and deﬁning the general class of adaptive optimization problems that we
address in this paper. For sake of clarity, we will illustrate our notation using the sensor placement application
mentioned in §1. We give examples of other applications in §6, §7, §8, and §9.
2.1 Items and Realizations
Let E be a ﬁnite set of items (e.g., sensor locations). Each item e ∈E is in a particular (initially unknown)
state from a set O of possible states (describing whether a sensor placed at location e would malfunction or
not). We represent the item states using a function φ : E →O, called a realization (of the states of all items in
the ground set). Thus, we say that φ(e) is the state of e under realization φ. We use Φ to denote a random
realization. We take a Bayesian approach and assume that there is a known prior probability distribution
p (φ) := P [Φ = φ] over realizations (e.g., modeling that sensors fail independently with failure probability),
so that we can compute posterior distributions2. We will consider problems where we sequentially pick an
item e ∈E, get to see its state Φ(e), pick the next item, get to see its state, and so on (e.g., place a sensor, see
whether it fails, and so on). After each pick, our observations so far can be represented as a partial realization
ψ, a function from some subset of E (i.e., the set of items that we already picked) to their states (e.g., ψ encodes
where we placed sensors and which of them failed). For notational convenience, we sometimes represent ψ as
a relation, so that ψ ⊆E × O equals {(e, o) : ψ(e) = o}. We use the notation dom(ψ) = {e : ∃o.(e, o) ∈ψ}
to refer to the domain of ψ (i.e., the set of items observed in ψ). A partial realization ψ is consistent with a
realization φ if they are equal everywhere in the domain of ψ. In this case we write φ ∼ψ. If ψ and ψ′ are
both consistent with some φ, and dom(ψ) ⊆dom(ψ′), we say ψ is a subrealization of ψ′. Equivalently, ψ is
a subrealization of ψ′ if and only if, when viewed as relations, ψ ⊆ψ′.
Partial realizations are similar to the notion of “belief states” in Partially Observable Markov Decision
Problems (POMDPs), as they encode the effect of all actions taken (items selected) and observations made,
and determine our posterior belief about the state of the world (i.e., the state of all items e not yet selected,
p (φ | ψ) := P [Φ = φ | Φ ∼ψ]).
2.2 Policies
We encode our adaptive strategy for picking items as a policy π, which is a function from a set of partial
realizations to E, specifying which item to pick next under a particular set of observations (e.g., π chooses
the next sensor location given where we have placed sensors so far, and whether they failed or not). We also
allow randomized policies that are functions from a set of partial realizations to distributions on E, though
our emphasis will primarily be on deterministic policies. If ψ is not in the domain of π, the policy terminates
(stops picking items) upon observation of ψ. We use dom(π) to denote the domain of π. Technically, we
require that dom(π) be closed under subrealizations. That is, if ψ′ ∈dom(π) and ψ is a subrealization of ψ′
then ψ ∈dom(π). We use the notation E(π, φ) to refer to the set of items selected by π under realization
φ. Each deterministic policy π can be associated with a decision tree T π in a natural way (see Fig. 1 for an
2. In some situations, we may not have exact knowledge of the prior p (φ). Obtaining algorithms that are robust to incorrect priors
remains an interesting source of open problems. We brieﬂy discuss some robustness guarantees of our algorithm in §4 on page 9.
4

Figure 1: Illustration of a policy π, its corresponding decision tree representation, and the decision tree
representation of π[2], the level 2 truncation of π (as deﬁned in §5.1).
illustration). Here, we adopt a policy-centric view that admits concise notation, though we ﬁnd the decision
tree view to be valuable conceptually.
Since partial realizations are similar to POMDP belief states, our deﬁnition of policies is similar to the
notion of policies in POMDPs, which are usually deﬁned as functions from belief states to actions. We will
further discuss the relationship between the stochastic optimization problems considered in this paper and
POMDPs in Section 13.
2.3 Adaptive Stochastic Maximization, Coverage, and Min-Sum Coverage
We wish to maximize, subject to some constraints, a utility function f : 2E × OE →R≥0 that depends on
which items we pick and which state each item is in (e.g., modeling the total area covered by the working
sensors). Based on this notation, the expected utility of a policy π is favg(π) := E [f(E(π, Φ), Φ)] where the
expectation is taken with respect to p (φ). The goal of the Adaptive Stochastic Maximization problem is to ﬁnd
a policy π∗such that
π∗∈arg max
π
favg(π) subject to |E(π, φ)| ≤k for all φ,
(1)
where k is a budget on how many items can be picked (e.g., we would like to adaptively choose k sensor
locations such that the working sensors provide as much information as possible in expectation).
Alternatively, we can specify a quota Q of utility that we would like to obtain, and try to ﬁnd the cheapest
policy achieving that quota (e.g., we would like to achieve a certain amount of information, as cheaply as
possible in expectation). Formally, we deﬁne the average cost cavg(π) of a policy as the expected number of
items it picks, so that cavg(π) := E [|E(π, Φ)|]. Our goal is then to ﬁnd
π∗∈arg min
π
cavg(π) such that f(E(π, φ), φ) ≥Q for all φ,
(2)
i.e., the policy π∗that minimizes the expected number of items picked such that under all possible realizations,
at least utility Q is achieved. We call Problem 2 the Adaptive Stochastic Minimum Cost Cover problem. We
will also consider the problem where we want to minimize the worst-case cost cwc(π) := maxφ |E(π, φ)|.
This worst-case cost cwc(π) is the cost incurred under adversarially chosen realizations, or equivalently the
depth of the deepest leaf in T π, the decision tree associated with π.
Yet another important variant is to minimize the average time required by a policy to obtain its utility.
Formally, let u(π, t) be the expected utility obtained by π after t steps3, let Q = E [f(E, Φ)] be the maximum
possible expected utility, and deﬁne the min-sum cost cΣ(π) of a policy as cΣ(π) := P∞
t=0 (Q −u(π, t)). We
then deﬁne the Adaptive Stochastic Min-Sum Cover problem as the search for
π∗∈arg min
π
cΣ(π) .
(3)
Unfortunately, as we will show in §12, even for linear functions f, i.e., those where f(A, φ) = P
e∈A we,φ
is simply the sum of weights (depending on the realization φ), Problems (1), (2), and (3) are hard to approximate
3. For a more formal deﬁnition of u(π, t), see §15.5 on page 56.
5

under reasonable complexity theoretic assumptions. Despite the hardness of the general problems, in the
following sections we will identify conditions that are sufﬁcient to allow us to approximately solve them.
2.4 Incorporating Item Costs
Instead of quantifying the cost of a set E(π, φ) by the number of elements |E(π, φ)|, we can also consider
the case where each item e ∈E has a cost c(e), and the cost of a set S ⊆E is c(S) = P
e∈S c(e). We can
then consider variants of Problems (1), (2), and (3) with the |E(π, φ)| replaced by c(E(π, φ)). For clarity of
presentation, we will focus on the unit cost case, i.e., c(e) = 1 for all e, and explain how our results generalize
to the non-uniform case in the Appendix.
3. Adaptive Submodularity
We ﬁrst review the classical notion of submodular set functions, and then introduce the novel notion of adaptive
submodularity.
3.1 Background on Submodularity
Let us ﬁrst consider the very special case where p (φ) is deterministic or, equivalently, |O| = 1 (e.g., in our
sensor placement applications, sensors never fail). In this case, the realization φ is known to the decision
maker in advance, and thus there is no beneﬁt in adaptive selection. Given the realization φ, Problem (1) is
equivalent to ﬁnding a set A∗⊆E such that
A∗∈arg max
A⊆E
f(A, φ) such that |A| ≤k.
(4)
For most interesting classes of utility functions f, this is an NP-hard optimization problem. However, in many
practical problems, such as those mentioned in §1, f(A) = f(A, φ) satisﬁes submodularity. A set function
f : 2E →R is called submodular if, whenever A ⊆B ⊆E and e ∈E \ B it holds that
f(A ∪{e}) −f(A) ≥f(B ∪{e}) −f(B),
(5)
i.e., adding e to the smaller set A increases f by at least as much as adding e to the superset B. Furthermore, f
is called monotone, if, whenever A ⊆B it holds that f(A) ≤f(B) (e.g., adding a sensor can never reduce the
amount of information obtained). A celebrated result by Nemhauser et al. (1978) states that for monotone sub-
modular functions with f(∅) = 0, a simple greedy algorithm that starts with the empty set, A0 = ∅and chooses
Ai+1 = Ai ∪{arg max
e∈E\Ai
f(Ai ∪{e})}
(6)
guarantees that f(Ak) ≥(1 −1/e) max|A|≤k f(A). Thus, the greedy set Ak obtains at least a (1 −1/e)
fraction of the optimal value achievable using k elements. Furthermore, Feige (1998) shows that this result
is tight if P ̸= NP; under this assumption no polynomial time algorithm can do strictly better than the greedy
algorithm, i.e., achieve a (1 −1/e + ϵ)-approximation for any constant ϵ > 0, even for the special case of
Maximum k-Cover where f(A) is the cardinality of the union of sets indexed by A. Similarly, Wolsey (1982)
shows that the same greedy algorithm also near-optimally solves the deterministic case of Problem (2), called
the Minimum Submodular Cover problem:
A∗∈arg min
A⊆E
|A| such that f(A) ≥Q.
(7)
Pick the ﬁrst set Aℓconstructed by the greedy algorithm such that f(Aℓ) ≥Q. Then, for integer-valued
submodular functions, ℓis at most |A∗|(1 + log maxe f(e)), i.e., the greedy set is at most a logarithmic
factor larger than the smallest set achieving quota Q. For the special case of Set Cover, where f(A) is the
6

cardinality of a union of sets indexed by A, this result matches a lower bound by Feige (1998): Unless
NP ⊆DTIME(nO(log log n)), Set Cover is hard to approximate by a factor better than (1 −ε) ln Q, where Q
is the number of elements to be covered.
Now let us relax the assumption that p (φ) is deterministic. In this case, we may still want to ﬁnd a non-
adaptive solution (i.e., a constant policy πA that always picks set A independently of Φ) maximizing favg(πA).
If f is pointwise submodular, i.e., f(A, φ) is submodular in A for any ﬁxed φ, the function f(A) = favg(πA)
is submodular, since nonnegative linear combinations of submodular functions remain submodular. Thus,
the greedy algorithm allows us to ﬁnd a near-optimal non-adaptive policy. That is, in our sensor placement
example, if we are willing to commit to all locations before ﬁnding out whether the sensors fail or not, the
greedy algorithm can provide a good solution to this non-adaptive problem.
However, in practice, we may be more interested in obtaining a non-constant policy π, that adaptively
chooses items based on previous observations (e.g., takes into account which sensors are working before
placing the next sensor). In many settings, selecting items adaptively offers huge advantages, analogous
to the advantage of binary search over sequential (linear) search4. Thus, the question is whether there is a
natural extension of submodularity to policies. In the following, we will develop such a notion – adaptive
submodularity.
3.2 Adaptive Monotonicity and Submodularity
The key challenge is to ﬁnd appropriate generalizations of monotonicity and of the diminishing returns
condition (5). We begin by again considering the very special case where p (φ) is deterministic, so that
the policies are non-adaptive. In this case a policy π simply speciﬁes a sequence of items (e1, e2, . . . , er)
which it selects in order. Monotonicity in this context can be characterized as the property that “the marginal
beneﬁt of selecting an item is always nonnegative,” meaning that for all such sequences (e1, e2, . . . , er),
items e and 1 ≤i ≤r it holds that f({ej : j ≤i} ∪{e}) −f({ej : j ≤i}) ≥0. Similarly, submodularity
can be viewed as the property that “selecting an item later never increases its marginal beneﬁt,” meaning
that for all sequences (e1, e2, . . . , er), items e, and all i ≤r, f({ej : j ≤i} ∪{e}) −f({ej : j ≤i}) ≥
f({ej : j ≤r} ∪{e}) −f({ej : j ≤r}).
We take these views of monotonicity and submodularity when deﬁning their adaptive analogues, by using
an appropriate generalization of the marginal beneﬁt. When moving to the general adaptive setting, the
challenge is that the items’ states are now random and only revealed upon selection. A natural approach is
thus to condition on observations (i.e., partial realizations of selected items), and take the expectation with
respect to the items that we consider selecting. Hence, we deﬁne our adaptive monotonicity and submodularity
properties in terms of the conditional expected marginal beneﬁt of an item.
Deﬁnition 1 (Conditional Expected Marginal Beneﬁt) Given a partial realization ψ and an item e, the
conditional expected marginal beneﬁt of e conditioned on having observed ψ, denoted ∆(e|ψ), is
∆(e|ψ) := E

f(dom(ψ) ∪{e} , Φ) −f(dom(ψ), Φ)
 Φ ∼ψ

(8)
where the expectation is computed with respect to p (φ | ψ) = P [Φ = φ | Φ ∼ψ]. Similarly, the conditional
expected marginal beneﬁt of a policy π is
∆(π|ψ) := E

f(dom(ψ) ∪E(π, Φ), Φ) −f(dom(ψ), Φ)
 Φ ∼ψ

.
(9)
In our sensor placement example, ∆(e|ψ) quantiﬁes the expected amount of additional area covered by
placing a sensor at location e, in expectation over the posterior distribution pΦ(e)(o) := P [Φ(e) = o | Φ ∼ψ]
of whether the sensor will fail or not, and taking into account the area covered by the placed working
4. We provide a well–known example in active learning that illustrates this phenomenon crisply in §9; see Fig. 4 on page 24. We
consider the general question of the magnitude of the potential beneﬁts of adaptivity in §11 on page 31 .
7

sensors as encoded by ψ. Note that the beneﬁt we have accrued upon observing ψ (and hence after having
selected the items in dom(ψ)) is E [f(dom(ψ), Φ) | Φ ∼ψ], which is the beneﬁt term subtracted out in
Eq. (8) and Eq. (9). Similarly, the expected total beneﬁt obtained after observing ψ and then selecting e is
E [f(dom(ψ) ∪{e} , Φ) | Φ ∼ψ]. The corresponding beneﬁt for running π after observing ψ is slightly
more complex. Under realization φ ∼ψ, the ﬁnal cumulative beneﬁt will be f(dom(ψ) ∪E(π, φ), φ). Taking
the expectation with respect to p (φ | ψ) and subtracting out the beneﬁt already obtained by dom(ψ) then
yields the conditional expected marginal beneﬁt of π.
We are now ready to introduce our generalizations of monotonicity and submodularity to the adaptive
setting:
Deﬁnition 2 (Adaptive Monotonicity) A function f : 2E × OE →R≥0 is adaptive monotone with respect
to distribution p (φ) if the conditional expected marginal beneﬁt of any item is nonnegative, i.e., for all ψ with
P [Φ ∼ψ] > 0 and all e ∈E we have
∆(e|ψ) ≥0.
(10)
Deﬁnition 3 (Adaptive Submodularity) A function f : 2E × OE →R≥0 is adaptive submodular with
respect to distribution p (φ) if the conditional expected marginal beneﬁt of any ﬁxed item does not increase as
more items are selected and their states are observed. Formally, f is adaptive submodular w.r.t. p (φ) if for all
ψ and ψ′ such that ψ is a subrealization of ψ′ (i.e., ψ ⊆ψ′), and for all e ∈E \ dom(ψ′), we have
∆(e|ψ) ≥∆(e|ψ′) .
(11)
From the decision tree perspective, the condition ∆(e|ψ) ≥∆(e|ψ′) amounts to saying that for any
decision tree T, if we are at a node v in T which selects an item e, and compare the expected marginal beneﬁt
of e selected at v with the expected marginal beneﬁt e would have obtained if it were selected at an ancestor of
v in T, then the latter must be no smaller than the former. Note that when comparing the two expected marginal
beneﬁts, there is a difference in both the set of items previously selected (i.e., dom(ψ) vs. dom(ψ′)) and
in the distribution over realizations (i.e., p (φ | ψ) vs. p (φ | ψ′)). It is also worth emphasizing that adaptive
submodularity is deﬁned relative to the distribution p (φ) over realizations; it is possible that f is adaptive
submodular with respect to one distribution, but not with respect to another.
We will give concrete examples of adaptive monotone and adaptive submodular functions that arise in
the applications introduced in §1 in §6, §7, §8, and §9. In the Appendix, we will explain how the notion of
adaptive submodularity can be extended to handle non-uniform costs (since, e.g., the cost of placing a sensor
at an easily accessible location may be smaller than at a location that is hard to get to).
3.3 Properties of Adaptive Submodular Functions
It can be seen that adaptive monotonicity and adaptive submodularity enjoy similar closure properties as
monotone submodular functions. In particular, if w1, . . . , wm ≥0 and f1, . . . , fm are adaptive monotone
submodular w.r.t. distribution p (φ), then f(A, φ) = Pm
i=1 wifi(A, φ) is adaptive monotone submodular w.r.t.
p (φ). Similarly, for a ﬁxed constant c ≥0 and adaptive monotone submodular function f, the function
g(E, φ) = min(f(E, φ), c) is adaptive monotone submodular. Thus, adaptive monotone submodularity is
preserved by nonnegative linear combinations and by truncation. Adaptive monotone submodularity is also
preserved by restriction, so that if f : 2E × OE →R≥0 is adaptive monotone submodular w.r.t. p (φ), then for
any e ∈E, the function g : 2E\{e} × OE →R≥0 deﬁned by g(A, φ) := f(A, φ) for all A ⊆E \ {e} and all
φ is also adaptive submodular w.r.t. p (φ). Finally, if f : 2E × OE →R≥0 is adaptive monotone submodular
w.r.t. p (φ) then for each partial realization ψ the conditional function g(A, φ) := f(A ∪dom(ψ), φ) is
adaptive monotone submodular w.r.t. p (φ | ψ) := P [Φ = φ | Φ ∼ψ].
3.4 What Problem Characteristics Suggest Adaptive Submodularity?
Adaptive submodularity is a diminishing returns property for policies. Speaking informally, it can be applied
in situations where there is an objective function to be optimized does not feature synergies in the beneﬁts
8

of items conditioned on observations. In some cases, the primary objective might not have this property, but
a suitably chosen proxy of it does, as is the case with active learning with persistent noise (Golovin et al.,
2010; Bellala and Scott, 2010). We give example applications in §6 through §9. It is also worth mentioning
where adaptive submodularity is not directly applicable. An extreme example of synergistic effects between
items conditioned on observations is the class of “treasure hunting” instances used to prove Theorem 26 on
page 33, where the (binary) state of certain groups of items encode the treasure’s location in a complex manner.
Another problem feature which adaptive submodularity does not directly address is the possibility that items
selection can alter the underlying realization φ, as is the case for the problem of optimizing policies for general
POMDPs.
4. The Adaptive Greedy Policy
The classical non-adaptive greedy algorithm (6) has a natural generalization to the adaptive setting. The greedy
policy πgreedy tries, at each iteration, to myopically increase the expected objective value, given its current
observations. That is, suppose f : 2E × OE →R≥0 is the objective, and ψ is the partial realization indicating
the states of items selected so far. Then the greedy policy will select the item e maximizing the expected increase
in value, conditioned on the observed states of items it has already selected (i.e., conditioned on Φ ∼ψ). That is,
it will select e to maximize the conditional expected marginal beneﬁt ∆(e|ψ) as deﬁned in Eq. (8). Pseudocode
of the adaptive greedy algorithm is given in Algorithm 1. The only difference to the classic, non-adaptive
greedy algorithm studied by Nemhauser et al. (1978), is Line 1, where an observation Φ(e∗) of the selected
item e∗is obtained. Note that the algorithms in this section are presented for Adaptive Stochastic Maximization.
For the coverage objectives, we simply keep selecting items as prescribed by πgreedy until achieving the quota
on objective value (for the min-cost objective) or until we have selected every item (for the min-sum objective).
4.1 Incorporating Item Costs
The adaptive greedy algorithm can be naturally modiﬁed to handle non-uniform item costs by replacing its
selection rule by
e∗∈arg max
e
∆(e|ψ)
c(e)
.
In the following, we will focus on the uniform cost case (c ≡1), and defer the analysis with costs to the
Appendix.
4.2 Approximate Greedy Selection
In some applications, ﬁnding an item maximizing ∆(e|ψ) may be computationally intractable, and the best
we can do is ﬁnd an α-approximation to the best greedy selection. This means we ﬁnd an e′ such that
∆(e′ |ψ) ≥1
α max
e
∆(e|ψ) .
We call a policy which always selects such an item an α-approximate greedy policy.
4.3 Robustness & Approximate Greedy Selection
As we will show, α-approximate greedy policies have performance guarantees on several problems. The fact
that these performance guarantees of greedy policies are robust to approximate greedy selection suggests a
particular robustness guarantee against incorrect priors p (φ). Speciﬁcally, if our incorrect prior p′ is such
that when we evaluate ∆(e|ψ) we err by a multiplicative factor of at most α, then when we compute the
greedy policy with respect to p′ we are actually implementing an α-approximate greedy policy (with respect
to the true prior), and hence obtain the corresponding guarantees. For example, a sufﬁcient condition for
erring by at most a multiplicative factor of α is that there exists c ≤1 and d ≥1 with α = d/c such that
c p (φ) ≤p′ (φ) ≤d p (φ) for all φ, where p is the true prior.
9

Input: Budget k; ground set E; distribution p (φ); function f.
Output: Set A ⊆E of size k
begin
A ←∅; ψ ←∅;
1
for i = 1 to k do
2
foreach e ∈E \ A do compute ∆(e|ψ) = E [f(A ∪{e} , Φ) −f(A, Φ) | Φ ∼ψ] ;
3
Select e∗∈arg maxe ∆(e|ψ);
4
Set A ←A ∪{e∗};
5
Observe Φ(e∗); Set ψ ←ψ ∪{(e∗, Φ(e∗))};
6
end
Algorithm 1: The adaptive greedy algorithm, which implements the greedy policy.
4.4 Lazy Evaluations and the Accelerated Adaptive Greedy Algorithm
The deﬁnition of adaptive submodularity allows us to implement an “accelerated” version of the adaptive
greedy algorithm using lazy evaluations of marginal beneﬁts as originally suggested for the non-adaptive case
by Minoux (1978). The idea is as follows. Suppose we run πgreedy under some ﬁxed realization φ, and select
items e1, e2, . . . , ek. Let ψi := {(ej, φ(ej) : j ≤i)} be the partial realizations observed during the run of
πgreedy. The adaptive greedy algorithm computes ∆(e|ψi) for all e ∈E and 0 ≤i < k, unless e ∈dom(ψi).
Naively, the algorithm thus needs to compute Θ(|E|k) marginal beneﬁts (which can be expensive to compute).
The key insight is that i 7→∆(e|ψi) is nonincreasing for all e ∈E, because of the adaptive submodularity
of the objective. Hence, if when deciding which item to select as ei we know ∆(e′ |ψj) ≤∆(e|ψi) for
some items e′ and e and j < i, then we may conclude ∆(e′ |ψi) ≤∆(e|ψi) and hence eliminate the need to
compute ∆(e′ |ψi). The accelerated version of the adaptive greedy algorithm exploits this observation in a
principled manner, by computing ∆(e|ψ) for items e in decreasing order of the upper bounds known on them,
until it ﬁnds an item whose value is at least as great as the upper bounds of all other items. Pseudocode of this
version of the adaptive greedy algorithm is given in Algorithm 2.
In the non-adaptive setting, the use of lazy evaluations has been shown to signiﬁcantly reduce running
times in practice (Leskovec et al., 2007). We evaluated the naive and accelerated implementations of the
adaptive greedy algorithm on two sensor selection problems, and obtained speedup factors that range from
roughly 4 to 40 for those problems. See §10 on page 29 for details.
5. Guarantees for the Greedy Policy
In this section we show that if the objective function is adaptive submodular with respect to the probabilistic
model of the environment in which we operate, then the greedy policy inherits precisely the performance
guarantees of the greedy algorithm for classic (non-adaptive) submodular maximization and submodular
coverage problems, such as Maximum k-Cover and Minimum Set Cover, as well as min-sum submodular
coverage problems, such as Min-Sum Set Cover. In fact, we will show that this holds true more generally:
α–approximate greedy policies inherit precisely the performance guarantees of α–approximate greedy algo-
rithms for these classic problems. These guarantees suggest that adaptive submodularity is an appropriate
generalization of submodularity to policies. In this section we focus on the unit cost case (i.e., every item
has the same cost). In the Appendix we provide the proofs omitted in this section, and show how our results
extend to non-uniform item costs if we greedily maximize the expected beneﬁt/cost ratio.
5.1 The Maximum Coverage Objective
In this section we consider the maximum coverage objective, where the goal is to select k items adaptively to
maximize their expected value. The task of maximizing expected value subject to more complex constraints,
10

Input: Budget k; ground set E; distribution p (φ); function f.
Output: Set A ⊆E of size k
begin
A ←∅; ψ ←∅; Priority Queue Q ←EMPTY QUEUE;
1
foreach e ∈E do Q. insert(e, +∞);
2
for i = 1 to k do
3
δmax ←−∞; emax ←NULL;
4
while δmax < Q. maxPriority( ) do
5
e ←Q. pop( );
6
δ ←∆(e|ψ) = E [f(A ∪{e} , Φ) −f(A, Φ) | Φ ∼ψ];
7
Q. insert(e, δ);
8
if δmax < δ then
9
δmax ←δ; emax ←e;
10
A ←A ∪{emax}; Q. remove(emax);
11
Observe Φ(emax); Set ψ ←ψ ∪{(emax, Φ(emax))};
12
end
Algorithm 2: The accelerated version of the adaptive greedy algorithm. Here, Q. insert(e, δ) inserts e
with priority δ, Q. pop( ) removes and returns the item with greatest priority, Q. maxPriority( ) returns
the maximum priority of the elements in Q, and Q. remove(e) deletes e from Q.
such as matroid constraints and intersections of matroid constraints, is considered in the work of Golovin and
Krause (2011b). Before stating our result, we require the following deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 4 (Policy Truncation) For a policy π, deﬁne the level-k-truncation π[k] of π to be the policy
obtained by running π until it terminates or until it selects k items, and then terminating.
Formally,
dom(π[k]) = {ψ ∈dom(π) : |ψ| < k}, and π[k](ψ) = π(ψ) for all ψ ∈dom(π[k]).
We have the following result, which generalizes the classic result of the work of Nemhauser et al. (1978)
that the greedy algorithm achieves a (1 −1/e)-approximation to the problem of maximizing monotone
submodular functions under a cardinality constraint. By setting ℓ= k and α = 1 in Theorem 5, we see that
the greedy policy which selects k items adaptively obtains at least (1 −1/e) of the value of the optimal policy
that selects k items adaptively, measured with respect to favg. For a proof see Theorem 38 in Appendix 15.3,
which generalizes Theorem 5 to nonuniform item costs.
Theorem 5 Fix any α ≥1. If f is adaptive monotone and adaptive submodular with respect to the distribution
p (φ), and π is an α-approximate greedy policy, then for all policies π∗and positive integers ℓand k,
favg(π[ℓ]) >

1 −e−ℓ/αk
favg(π∗
[k]).
In particular, with ℓ= k this implies any α-approximate greedy policy achieves a
 1 −e−1/α
approximation
to the expected reward of the best policy, if both are terminated after running for an equal number of steps.
If the greedy rule can be implemented only with small absolute error rather than small relative error, i.e.,
∆(e′ |ψ) ≥maxe ∆(e|ψ) −ε, an argument similar to that used to prove Theorem 5 shows that
favg(π[ℓ]) ≥

1 −e−ℓ/k
favg(π∗
[k]) −ℓε.
This is important, since small absolute error can always be achieved (with high probability) whenever f can be
evaluated efﬁciently, and sampling p (φ | ψ) is efﬁcient. In this case, we can approximate
∆(e|ψ) ≈1
N
N
X
i=1

f(dom(ψ) ∪{e} , φi) −f(dom(ψ), φi)

,
where φi are sampled i.i.d. from p (φ | ψ).
11

5.1.1 DATA DEPENDENT BOUNDS
For the maximum coverage objective, adaptive submodular functions have another attractive feature: they allow
us to obtain data dependent bounds on the optimum, in a manner similar to the bounds for the non-adaptive
case (Minoux, 1978). Consider the non-adaptive problem of maximizing a monotone submodular function
f : 2A →R≥0 subject to the constraint |A| ≤k. Let A∗be an optimal solution, and ﬁx any A ⊆E. Then
f(A∗) ≤f(A) +
max
B:|B|≤k
X
e∈B
(f(A ∪{e}) −f(A))
(12)
because setting B = A∗we have f(A∗) ≤f(A ∪B) ≤f(A) + P
e∈B (f(A ∪{e}) −f(A)). Note that
unlike the original objective, we can easily compute maxB:|B|≤k
P
e∈B (f(A ∪{e}) −f(A)) by computing
δ(e) := f(A ∪{e}) −f(A) for each e, and summing the k largest values. Hence we can quickly compute an
upper bound on our distance from the optimal value, f(A∗) −f(A). In practice, such data-dependent bounds
can be much tighter than the problem-independent performance guarantees of Nemhauser et al. (1978) for
the greedy algorithm (Leskovec et al., 2007). Further note that these bounds hold for any set A, not just sets
selected by the greedy algorithm.
These data dependent bounds have the following analogue for adaptive monotone submodular functions.
See Appendix 15.2 for a proof.
Lemma 6 (The Adaptive Data Dependent Bound) Suppose we have made observations ψ after selecting
dom(ψ). Let π∗be any policy such that |E(π∗, φ)| ≤k for all φ. Then for adaptive monotone submodular f
∆(π∗|ψ) ≤
max
A⊆E,|A|≤k
X
e∈A
∆(e|ψ) .
(13)
Thus, after running any policy π, we can efﬁciently compute a bound on the additional beneﬁt that the optimal
solution π∗could obtain beyond the reward of π. We do that by computing the conditional expected marginal
beneﬁts for all elements e, and summing the k largest of them. Note that these bounds can be computed on
the ﬂy when running the greedy algorithm, in a similar manner as discussed by Leskovec et al. (2007) for the
non-adaptive setting.
5.2 The Min Cost Cover Objective
Another natural objective is to minimize the number of items selected while ensuring that a sufﬁcient level of
value is obtained. This leads to the Adaptive Stochastic Minimum Cost Coverage problem described in §2,
namely π∗∈arg minπ cavg(π) such that f(E(π, φ), φ) ≥Q for all φ. Recall that cavg(π) is the expected
cost of π, which in the unit cost case equals the expected number of items selected by π, i.e., cavg(π) :=
E [|E(π, Φ)|]. If the objective is adaptive monotone submodular, this is an adaptive version of the Minimum
Submodular Cover problem (described on line (7) in §3.1). Recall that the greedy algorithm is known to give a
(ln(Q) + 1)-approximation for Minimum Submodular Cover assuming the coverage function is integer-valued
in addition to being monotone submodular (Wolsey, 1982). Adaptive Stochastic Minimum Cost Coverage
is also related to the (Noisy) Interactive Submodular Set Cover problem studied by Guillory and Bilmes
(2010, 2011), which considers the worst-case setting (i.e., there is no distribution over states; instead states
are realized in an adversarial manner). Similar results for active learning have been proved by Kosaraju et al.
(1999) and Dasgupta (2004), as we discuss in more detail in §9.
We assume throughout this section that there exists a quality threshold Q such that f(E, φ) = Q for all φ,
and for all S ⊆E and all φ, f(S, φ) ≤Q. Note that, as discussed in Section 3, if we replace f(S, φ) by a new
function g(S, φ) = min(f(S, φ), Q′) for some constant Q′, g will be adaptive submodular if f is. Thus, if
f(E, φ) varies across realizations, we can instead use the greedy algorithm on the function truncated at some
threshold Q′ ≤minφ f(E, φ) achievable by all realizations.
In contrast to Adaptive Stochastic Maximization, for the coverage problem additional subtleties arise. In
particular, it is not enough that a policy π achieves value Q for the true realization; in order for π to terminate,
it also requires a proof of this fact. Formally, we require that π covers f:
12

Deﬁnition 7 (Coverage) Let ψ = ψ(π, φ) be the partial realization encoding all states observed during the
execution of π under realization φ. Given f : 2E × OE →R, we say a policy π covers φ with respect to f if
f(dom(ψ), φ′) = f(E, φ′) for all φ′ ∼ψ. We say that π covers f if it covers every realization with respect to
f.
Coverage is deﬁned in such a way that upon terminating, π might not know which realization is the true one,
but has guaranteed that it has achieved the maximum reward in every possible case (i.e., for every realization
consistent with its observations). We obtain results for both the average and worst-case cost objectives.
5.2.1 MINIMIZING THE AVERAGE COST
Before presenting our approximation guarantee for the Adaptive Stochastic Minimum Cost Coverage, we
introduce a special class of instances, called self–certifying instances. We make this distinction because the
greedy policy has stronger performance guarantees for self–certifying instances, and such instances arise
naturally in applications. For example, the Stochastic Submodular Cover and Stochastic Set Cover instances in
§7, the Adaptive Viral Marketing instances in §8, and the Pool-Based Active Learning instances in §9 are all
self–certifying.
Deﬁnition 8 (Self–Certifying Instances) An instance of Adaptive Stochastic Minimum Cost Coverage is
self–certifying if whenever a policy achieves the maximum possible value for the true realization it immediately
has a proof of this fact. Formally, an instance (f, p (φ)) is self–certifying if for all φ, φ′, and ψ such that
φ ∼ψ and φ′ ∼ψ, we have f(dom(ψ), φ) = f(E, φ) if and only if f(dom(ψ), φ′) = f(E, φ′).
One class of self–certifying instances which commonly arise are those in which f(A, φ) depends only
on the state of items in A, and in which there is a uniform maximum amount of reward that can be obtained
across realizations. Formally, we have the following observation.
Proposition 9 Fix an instance (f, p (φ)). If there exists Q such that f(E, φ) = Q for all φ and there exists
some g : 2E×O →R≥0 such that f(A, φ) = g ({(e, φ(e)) : e ∈A}) for all A and φ, then (f, p (φ)) is
self–certifying.
Proof Fix φ, φ′, and ψ such that φ ∼ψ and φ′ ∼ψ. Assuming the existence of g and treating ψ as a relation,
we have f(dom(ψ), φ) = g(ψ) = f(dom(ψ), φ′). Hence f(dom(ψ), φ) = Q = f(E, φ) if and only if
f(dom(ψ), φ′) = Q = f(E, φ′).
For our results on minimum cost coverage, we also need a stronger monotonicity condition and a stronger
submodularity condition:
Deﬁnition 10 (Strong Adaptive Monotonicity) A function f : 2E ×OE →R is strongly adaptive monotone
with respect to p (φ) if, informally “selecting more items never hurts” with respect to the expected reward.
Formally, for all ψ, all e /∈dom(ψ), and all possible outcomes o ∈O such that P [Φ(e) = o | Φ ∼ψ] > 0,
we require
E [f(dom(ψ), Φ) | Φ ∼ψ] ≤E [f(dom(ψ) ∪{e} , Φ) | Φ ∼ψ, Φ(e) = o] .
(14)
Strong adaptive monotonicity implies adaptive monotonicity, as the latter means that “selecting more items
never hurts in expectation,” i.e.,
E [f(dom(ψ), Φ) | Φ ∼ψ] ≤E [f(dom(ψ) ∪{e} , Φ) | Φ ∼ψ] .
To deﬁne strong adaptive submodularity, we ﬁrst need the following extension of ∆(e|ψ):
Deﬁnition 11 (Conditional Expected Marginal Beneﬁt (Extended version)) Given partial realizations
ψ ⊆ψ′, let
∆(e|ψ; ψ′) := E

f(dom(ψ) ∪{e} , Φ) −f(dom(ψ), Φ)
 Φ ∼ψ′

(15)
13

Deﬁnition 12 (Strong Adaptive Submodularity) A function f : 2E × OE →R≥0 is strongly adaptive
submodular with respect to distribution p (φ) if it is adaptive submodular and moreover the expected marginal
beneﬁt of any ﬁxed item does not increase as more items are selected and their states are observed, conditioned
on the (item, observation) pairs. Formally, f is adaptive submodular w.r.t. p (φ) if for all ψ and ψ′ such that
ψ is a subrealization of ψ′ (i.e., ψ ⊆ψ′), and for all e ∈E \ dom(ψ′), we have
∆(e|ψ; ψ′) ≥∆(e|ψ′) .
(16)
In other words, conditioning on ψ′, adding items dom(ψ′) \ dom(ψ) cannot increase the expected marginal
beneﬁt of e.
A sufﬁcient condition for strong adaptive submodularity with respect to p (φ) is that the function be
adaptive submodular and pointwise submodular (i.e., f(A, φ) is submodular in A for any ﬁxed φ), as we
prove in Appendix 15.4. It is worth noting that pointwise submodularity is not sufﬁcient to establish adaptive
submodularity. A simple counterexample is f(S, φ) = | {e : e ∈S, φ(e) = 1} |, with p (φ) = 1/2 if ∀e ∈
E, φ(e) = 1 and p (φ) = 1/2 if ∀e ∈E, φ(e) = 0. In that case, ∆(e|∅) = 1/2 yet ∆(e|{(e′, 1)}) = 1 for
any e′ ̸= e.
We now state our main result for the average case cost cavg(π):
Theorem 13 Suppose f : 2E × OE →R≥0 is strongly adaptive submodular and strongly adaptive monotone
with respect to p (φ) and there exists Q such that f(E, φ) = Q for all φ. Let η be any value such that
f(S, φ) > Q −η implies f(S, φ) = Q for all S and φ. Let δ = minφ p (φ) be the minimum probability of any
realization. Let π∗
avg be an optimal policy minimizing the expected number of items selected to guarantee every
realization is covered. Let π be an α-approximate greedy policy with respect to the item costs. Then in general
cavg(π) ≤α cavg(π∗
avg)

ln
 Q
δη

+ 1
2
and for self–certifying instances
cavg(π) ≤α cavg(π∗
avg)

ln
Q
η

+ 1
2
.
Note that if range(f) ⊂Z, then η = 1 is a valid choice, so for general and self–certifying instances we have
cavg(π) ≤α cavg(π∗
avg) (ln(Q/δ) + 1)2 and cavg(π) ≤α cavg(π∗
avg) (ln(Q) + 1)2, respectively.
Historical Note:
An earlier version of Theorem 13 claimed logarithmic approximation factors rather than
the squared–logarithmic factors present here. Unfortunately, the proof was ﬂawed as pointed out by Nan
and Saligrama (2017). Determining whether the logarithmic bounds hold remains an interesting open
problem. In particular, it remains open whether cavg(π) ≤α cavg(π∗
avg)

ln

Q
δη

+ 1

for general instances
and cavg(π) ≤α cavg(π∗
avg)

ln

Q
η

+ 1

for self–certifying instances under the conditions speciﬁed by
Theorem 13. It also remains open whether the strong adaptive submodularity condition is required.
5.2.2 MINIMIZING THE WORST-CASE COST
For the worst-case cost cwc(π) := maxφ |E(π, φ)|, strong adaptive monotonicity and strong submodularity
are not required; adaptive monotonicity and adaptive submodularity sufﬁce. We obtain the following result.
Theorem 14 Suppose f : 2E × OE →R≥0 is adaptive monotone and adaptive submodular with respect to
p (φ), and let η be any value such that f(S, φ) > f(E, φ) −η implies f(S, φ) = f(E, φ) for all S and φ. Let
δ = minφ p (φ) be the minimum probability of any realization. Let π∗
wc be the optimal policy minimizing the
worst-case number of queries to guarantee every realization is covered. Let π be an α-approximate greedy
policy. Finally, let Q := E [f(E, φ)] be the maximum possible expected reward. Then
cwc(π) ≤α cwc(π∗
wc)

ln
 Q
δη

+ 1

.
14

The proofs of Theorems 13 and 14 are given in Appendix 15.4.
Thus, even though adaptive submodularity is deﬁned w.r.t. a particular distribution, perhaps surprisingly,
the adaptive greedy algorithm is competitive even in the case of adversarially chosen realizations, against a
policy optimized to minimize the worst-case cost. Theorem 14 therefore suggests that if we do not have a
strong prior, we can obtain the strongest guarantees if we choose a distribution that is “as uniform as possible”
(i.e., maximizes δ) while still guaranteeing adaptive submodularity.
5.2.3 DISCUSSION
Note that the approximation factor for self–certifying instances in Theorem 14 reduces to the (ln(Q) + 1)-
approximation guarantee for the greedy algorithm for Set Cover instances with Q elements, in the case of
a deterministic distribution p (φ). Moreover, with a deterministic distribution p (φ) there is no distinction
between average-case and worst-case cost. Hence, an immediate corollary of the result of Feige (1998)
mentioned in §3 is that for every constant ϵ > 0 there is no polynomial time (1 −ϵ) ln (Q/η) approximation
algorithm for self–certifying instances of Adaptive Stochastic Min Cost Cover, under either the cavg(·) or the
cwc(·) objective, unless NP ⊆DTIME(nO(log log n)). It remains open to determine whether or not Adaptive
Stochastic Min Cost Cover with the worst-case cost objective admits a ln (Q/η) + 1 approximation for
self–certifying instances via a polynomial time algorithm, and in particular whether the greedy policy has
such an approximation guarantee. However, in Lemma 50 we show that Feige’s result also implies there is
no (1 −ϵ) ln (Q/δη) polynomial time approximation algorithm for general (non self-certifying) instances of
Adaptive Stochastic Min Cost Cover under either objective, unless NP ⊆DTIME(nO(log log n)). In that sense,
Theorem 14 is best-possible and Theorem 13 cannot be improved by more than a logarithmic factor and under
reasonable complexity-theoretic assumptions.
5.3 The Min-Sum Cover Objective
Yet another natural objective is the min-sum objective, in which an unrealized reward of x incurs a cost of x in
each time step, and the goal is to minimize the total cost incurred.
5.3.1 BACKGROUND ON THE NON-ADAPTIVE MIN-SUM COVER PROBLEM
In the non-adaptive setting, perhaps the simplest form of a coverage problem with this objective is the Min-Sum
Set Cover problem (Feige et al., 2004) in which the input is a set system (U, S), the output is a permutation of
the sets ⟨S1, S2, . . . , Sm⟩, and the goal is to minimize the sum of element coverage times, where the coverage
time of u is the index of the ﬁrst set that contains it (e.g., it is j if u ∈Sj and u /∈Si for all i < j). In
this problem and its generalizations the min-sum objective is useful in modeling processing costs in certain
applications, for example in ordering diagnostic tests to identify a disease cheaply (Kaplan et al., 2005), in
ordering multiple ﬁlters to be applied to database records while processing a query (Munagala et al., 2005),
or in ordering multiple heuristics to run on boolean satisﬁability instances as a means to solve them faster in
practice (Streeter and Golovin, 2008). A particularly expressive generalization of min-sum set cover has been
studied under the names Min-Sum Submodular Cover (Streeter and Golovin, 2008) and L1-Submodular Set
Cover (Golovin et al., 2008). The former paper extends the greedy algorithm to a natural online variant of the
problem, while the latter studies a parameterized family of Lp-Submodular Set Cover problems in which the
objective is analogous to minimizing the Lp norm of the coverage times for Min-Sum Set Cover instances. In
the Min-Sum Submodular Cover problem, there is a monotone submodular function f : 2E →R≥0 deﬁning
the reward obtained from a collection of elements5. There is an integral cost c(e) for each element, and the
output is a sequence of all of the elements σ = ⟨e1, e2, . . . , en⟩. For each t ∈R≥0, we deﬁne the set of
5. To encode Min-Sum Set Cover instance (U, S), let E := S and f(A) := | ∪e∈A e|, where each e ∈E is a subset of elements in U.
15

elements in the sequence σ within a budget of t:
σ[t] :=


ei :
X
j≤i
c(ej) ≤t


.
The cost we wish to minimize is then
cΣ(σ) :=
∞
X
t=0
 f(E) −f(σ[t])

.
(17)
Feige et al. (2004) proved that for Min-Sum Set cover, the greedy algorithm achieves a 4-approximation to
the minimum cost, and also that this is optimal in the sense that no polynomial time algorithm can achieve
a (4 −ϵ)-approximation, for any ϵ > 0, unless P = NP. Interestingly, the greedy algorithm also achieves a
4-approximation for the more general Min-Sum Submodular Cover problem as well (Streeter and Golovin,
2008; Golovin et al., 2008).
5.3.2 THE ADAPTIVE STOCHASTIC MIN-SUM COVER PROBLEM
In this article, we extend the result of Streeter and Golovin (2008) and Golovin et al. (2008) to an adaptive
version of Min-Sum Submodular Cover. For clarity’s sake we will consider the unit-cost case here (i.e.,
c(e) = 1 for all e); we show how to extend adaptive submodularity to handle general costs in the Appendix. In
the adaptive version of the problem, π[t] plays the role of σ[t], and favg plays the role of f. The goal is to ﬁnd a
policy π minimizing
cΣ(π) :=
∞
X
t=0
 E [f(E, Φ)] −favg(π[t])

=
X
φ
p (φ)
∞
X
t=0
 f(E, φ) −f(E(π[t], φ), φ)

.
(18)
We call this problem the Adaptive Stochastic Min-Sum Cover problem. The key difference between this
objective and the minimum cost cover objective is that here, the cost at each step is only the fractional extent
that we have not covered the true realization, whereas in the minimum cost cover objective we are charged
in full in each step until we have completely covered the true realization (according to Deﬁnition 7). We
prove the following result for the Adaptive Stochastic Min-Sum Cover problem with arbitrary item costs in
Appendix 15.5.
Theorem 15 Fix any α ≥1. If f is adaptive monotone and adaptive submodular with respect to the
distribution p (φ), π is an α-approximate greedy policy with respect to the item costs, and π∗is any policy,
then cΣ(π) ≤4α cΣ(π∗).
6. Application: Stochastic Submodular Maximization
As our ﬁrst application, consider the sensor placement problem introduced in §1. Suppose we would like to
monitor a spatial phenomenon such as temperature in a building. We discretize the environment into a set E of
locations. We would like to pick a subset A ⊆E of k locations that is most “informative”, where we use a set
function ˆf(A) to quantify the informativeness of placement A. Krause and Guestrin (2007) show that many
natural objective functions (such as reduction in predictive uncertainty measured in terms of Shannon entropy
with conditionally independent observations) are monotone submodular.
Now consider the problem, where the informativeness of a sensor is unknown before deployment (e.g.,
when deploying cameras for surveillance, the location of objects and their associated occlusions may not be
known in advance, or varying amounts of noise may reduce the sensing range). We can model this extension by
assigning a state φ(e) ∈O to each possible location, indicating the extent to which a sensor placed at location
e is working. To quantify the value of a set of sensor deployments under a realization φ indicating to what
16

extent the various sensors are working, we ﬁrst deﬁne (e, o) for each e ∈E and o ∈O, which represents the
placement of a sensor at location e which is in state o. We then suppose there is a function ˆf : 2E×O →R≥0
which quantiﬁes the informativeness of a set of sensor deployments in arbitrary states. (Note ˆf is a set function
taking a set of (sensor deployment, state) pairs as input.) The utility f(A, φ) of placing sensors at the locations
in A under realization φ is then
f(A, φ) := ˆf({(e, φ(e)) : e ∈A}).
We aim to adaptively place k sensors to maximize our expected utility. We assume that sensor failures at
each location are independent of each other, i.e., P [Φ = φ] = Q
e∈E P [Φ(e) = φ(e)] , where P [φ(e) = o] is
the probability that a sensor placed at location e will be in state o. Asadpour et al. (2008) studied a special
case of our problem, in which sensors either fail completely (in which case they contribute no value at all)
or work perfectly, under the name Stochastic Submodular Maximization. They proved that the adaptive greedy
algorithm obtains a (1−1/e) approximation to the optimal adaptive policy, provided ˆf is monotone submodular.
We extend their result to multiple types of failures by showing that f(A, φ) is adaptive submodular with respect
to distribution p (φ) and then invoking Theorem 5. Fig. 2 illustrates an instance of Stochastic Submodular
Maximization where f(A, φ) is the cardinality of union of sets index by A and parameterized by φ.
Theorem 16 Fix a prior such that P [Φ = φ] = Q
e∈E P [Φ(e) = φ(e)] and an integer k, and let the objective
function ˆf : 2E×O →R≥0 be monotone submodular. Let π be any α-approximate greedy policy attempting to
maximize f, and let π∗be any policy. Then for all positive integers ℓ,
favg(π[ℓ]) ≥

1 −e−ℓ/αk
favg(π∗
[k]).
In particular, if π is the greedy policy (i.e., α = 1) and ℓ= k, then favg(π[k]) ≥
 1 −1
e

favg(π∗
[k]).
Proof We prove Theorem 16 by ﬁrst proving f is adaptive monotone and adaptive submodular in this
model, and then applying Theorem 5. Adaptive monotonicity is readily proved after observing that f(·, φ)
is monotone for each φ. Moving on to adaptive submodularity, ﬁx any ψ, ψ′ such that ψ ⊆ψ′ and any
e /∈dom(ψ′). We aim to show ∆(e|ψ′) ≤∆(e|ψ). Intuitively, this is clear, as ∆(e|ψ′) is the expected
marginal beneﬁt of adding e to a larger base set than is the case with ∆(e|ψ), namely dom(ψ′) as compared
to dom(ψ), and the realizations are independent. To prove it rigorously, we deﬁne a coupled distribution
µ over pairs of realizations φ ∼ψ and φ′ ∼ψ′ such that φ(e′) = φ′(e′) for all e′ /∈dom(ψ′). Formally,
µ(φ, φ′) = Q
e∈E\dom(ψ) P [Φ(e) = φ(e)] if φ ∼ψ, φ′ ∼ψ′, and φ(e′) = φ′(e′) for all e′ /∈dom(ψ′);
otherwise µ(φ, φ′) = 0. (Note that µ(φ, φ′) > 0 implies φ(e′) = φ′(e′) for all e′ ∈dom(ψ) as well, since
φ ∼ψ, φ′ ∼ψ′, and ψ ⊆ψ′.) Also note that p (φ | ψ) = P
φ′ µ(φ, φ′) and p (φ′ | ψ′) = P
φ µ(φ, φ′).
Calculating ∆(e|ψ′) and ∆(e|ψ) using µ, we see that for any (φ, φ′) in the support of µ,
f(dom(ψ′) ∪{e} , φ′) −f(dom(ψ′), φ′)
=
ˆf(ψ′ ∪{(e, φ′(e))}) −ˆf(ψ′))
≤
ˆf(ψ ∪{(e, φ(e))}) −ˆf(ψ))
=
f(dom(ψ) ∪{e} , φ) −f(dom(ψ), φ)
from the submodularity of ˆf. Hence
∆(e|ψ′)
=
P
(φ,φ′) µ(φ, φ′) (f(dom(ψ′) ∪{e} , φ′) −f(dom(ψ′), φ′))
≤
P
(φ,φ′) µ(φ, φ′) (f(dom(ψ) ∪{e} , φ) −f(dom(ψ), φ))
=
∆(e|ψ)
which completes the proof.
17

Figure 2: Illustration of part of a Stochastic Set Cover instance. Shown are the supports of two distributions
over sets, indexed by items e (marked in blue) and e′ (yellow).
7. Application: Stochastic Submodular Coverage
Suppose that instead of wishing to adaptively place k unreliable sensors to maximize the utility of the
information obtained, as discussed in §6, we have a quota on utility and wish to adaptively place the minimum
number of unreliable sensors to achieve this quota. This amounts to a minimum-cost coverage version of
the Stochastic Submodular Maximization problem introduced in §6, which we call Stochastic Submodular
Coverage.
As in §6, in the Stochastic Submodular Coverage problem we suppose there is a function ˆf : 2E×O →R≥0
which quantiﬁes the utility of a set of sensors in arbitrary states. Also, the states of each sensor are independent,
so that P [Φ = φ] = Q
e∈E P [Φ(e) = φ(e)]. The goal is to obtain a quota Q of utility at minimum cost. Thus,
we deﬁne our objective as f(A, φ) := min
n
Q, ˆf({(e, φ(e)) : e ∈A})
o
, and want to ﬁnd a policy π covering
every realization and minimizing cavg(π) := E [|E(π, Φ)|]. We additionally assume that this quota can always
be obtained using sufﬁciently many sensor placements; formally, this amounts to f(E, φ) = Q for all φ. We
obtain the following result, whose proof we defer until the end of this section.
Theorem 17 Fix a prior with independent sensor states s.t. P [Φ = φ] = Q
e∈E P [Φ(e) = φ(e)], and let ˆf :
2E×O →R≥0 be a mon. submodular function. Fix Q ∈R≥0 s.t. f(A, φ) := min

Q, ˆf({(e, φ(e)) : e ∈A})

satisﬁes f(E, φ) = Q for all φ. Let η be any value such that f(S, φ) > Q −η implies f(S, φ) = Q for all S
and φ. Finally, let π be an α-approximate greedy policy for maximizing f, and let π∗be any policy. Then
cavg(π) ≤α cavg(π∗)

ln
Q
η

+ 1
2
.
7.1 A Special Case: The Stochastic Set Coverage Problem
The Stochastic Submodular Coverage problem is a generalization of the Stochastic Set Coverage problem (Goe-
mans and Vondr´ak, 2006). In Stochastic Set Coverage the underlying submodular objective ˆf is the number
of elements covered in some input set system. In other words, there is a ground set U of n elements to be
covered, and items E such that each item e is associated with a distribution over subsets of U. When an item
is selected, a set is sampled from its distribution, as illustrated in Fig. 2. The problem is to adaptively select
items until all elements of U are covered by sampled sets, while minimizing the expected number of items
selected. Like us, Goemans and Vondr´ak also assume that the subsets are sampled independently for each
item, and every element of U can be covered in every realization, so that f(E, φ) = |U| for all φ.
Goemans and Vondr´ak primarily investigated the adaptivity gap (quantifying how much adaptive policies
can outperform non-adaptive policies) of Stochastic Set Coverage, for variants in which items can be repeatedly
18

selected or not, and prove adaptivity gaps of Θ(log n) in the former case, and between Ω(n) and O(n2) in
the latter. They also provide an n-approximation algorithm. More recently, Liu et al. (2008) considered
a special case of Stochastic Set Coverage in which each item may be in one of two states. They were
motivated by a streaming database problem, in which a collection of queries sharing common ﬁlters must all
be evaluated on a stream element. They transform the problem to a Stochastic Set Coverage instance in which
(ﬁlter, query) pairs are to be covered by ﬁlter evaluations; which pairs are covered by a ﬁlter depends on the
(binary) outcome of evaluating it on the stream element. The resulting instances satisfy the assumption that
every element of U can be covered in every realization. They study, among other algorithms, the adaptive
greedy algorithm specialized to this setting, and show that if the subsets are sampled independently for
each item, so that P [Φ = φ] = Q
e P [Φ(e) = φ(e)], then it is an Hn := Pn
x=1
1
x approximation. (Recall
ln(n) ≤Hn ≤ln(n) + 1 for all n ≥1.) Moreover, Liu et al. report that it empirically outperforms a number
of other algorithms in their experiments.
The adaptive submodularity framework allows us to prove approximate results for richer item distributions
over subsets of U than considered by Liu et al. (2008) as a corollary of Theorem 17. Speciﬁcally, we obtain a
(ln(n) + 1)2-approximation for the Stochastic Set Coverage problem with arbitrarily many outcomes for each
stochastic set, where n := |U|.
We model the Stochastic Set Coverage problem by letting φ(e) ⊆U indicate the random set sampled from
e’s distribution. Since the sampled sets are independent we have P [Φ = φ] = Q
e P [Φ(e) = φ(e)]. For any
A ⊆E let f(A, φ) := | ∪e∈A φ(e)| be the number of elements of U covered by the sets sampled from items
in A. As in the previous work mentioned above, we assume f(E, φ) = n for all φ. Therefore we may set
Q = n. Since the range of f includes only integers, we may set η = 1. Applying Theorem 17 then yields the
following result.
Corollary 18 The adaptive greedy algorithm achieves a (ln(n) + 1)2-approximation for Stochastic Set
Coverage, where n := |U| is the size of the ground set.
We now provide the proof of Theorem 17.
Proof of Theorem 17: We will ultimately prove Theorem 17 by applying the bound from Theorem 13 for
Stochastic Submodular Cover instances.
The proof mostly consists of justifying this application. Without loss of generality we may assume ˆf is
truncated at Q, otherwise we may use ˆg(S) = min
n
Q, ˆf(S)
o
in lieu of ˆf. This removes the need to truncate
f. Since we established the adaptive submodularity of f in the proof of Theorem 16, and by assumption
f(E, φ) = Q for all φ, to apply Theorem 13 we need only show that f is strongly adaptive monotone and
strongly adaptive submodular and that the instances under consideration are self–certifying.
We begin by showing the strong adaptive monotonicity of f. Fix a partial realization ψ, an item e /∈dom(ψ)
and a state o. Let ψ′ = ψ ∪{(e, o)}. Then treating ψ and ψ′ as subsets of E × O, and using the monotonicity
of ˆf, we obtain
E [f(dom(ψ), Φ) | Φ ∼ψ] = ˆf(ψ) ≤ˆf(ψ′) ≤E [f(dom(ψ′), Φ) | Φ ∼ψ′] ,
which is equivalent to the strong adaptive monotonicity condition.
Next we show the strong adaptive adaptive submodularity of f by showing it is pointwise submod-
ular (having already proven adaptive submodularity for it). This is clearly true, since for all φ, S 7→
ˆf({(e, φ(e)) : e ∈S}) is monotone submodular by assumption.
Finally we prove that these instances are self–certifying. Consider any ψ and φ, φ′ consistent with ψ. Then
f(dom(ψ), φ) = ˆf(ψ) = f(dom(ψ), φ′).
Since f(E, φ) = f(E, φ′) = Q by assumption, it follows that f(dom(ψ), φ) = f(E, φ) iff f(dom(ψ), φ′) =
f(E, φ′), so the instance is self–certifying.
We have shown that f and p (φ) satisfy the assumptions of Theorem 13 on this self–certifying instance.
Hence we may apply it to obtain the claimed approximation guarantee.
■
19

Figure 3: Illustration of the Adaptive Viral Marketing problem. Left: the underlying social network. Middle:
the people inﬂuenced and the observations obtained after one person is selected.
8. Application: Adaptive Viral Marketing
For our next application, consider the following scenario. Suppose we would like to generate demand for a
genuinely novel product. Potential customers do not realize how valuable the new product will be to them, and
conventional advertisements are failing to convince them to try it. In this case, we may try to spur demand by
offering a special promotional deal to a select few people, and hope that demand builds virally, propagating
through the social network as people recommend the product to their friends and associates. Supposing we
know something about the structure of the social networks people inhabit, and how ideas, innovation, and new
product adoption diffuse through them, this begs the question: to which initial set of people should we offer
the promotional deal, in order to spur maximum demand for our product?
This, broadly, is the viral marketing problem. The same problem arises in the context of spreading
technological, cultural, and intellectual innovations, broadly construed. In the interest of uniﬁed terminology
we follow Kempe et al. (2003) and talk of spreading inﬂuence through the social network, where we say people
are active if they have adopted the idea or innovation in question, and inactive otherwise, and that a inﬂuences
b if a convinces b to adopt the idea or innovation in question.
There are many ways to model the diffusion dynamics governing the spread of inﬂuence in a social network.
We consider a basic and well-studied model, the independent cascade model, described in detail below. For this
model Kempe et al. (2003) obtain a very interesting result; they show that the eventual spread of the inﬂuence
f (i.e., the ultimate number of customers that demand the product) is a monotone submodular function of the
seed set S of people initially selected. This, in conjunction with the results of Nemhauser et al. (1978) implies
that the greedy algorithm obtains at least
 1 −1
e

of the value of the best feasible seed set of size at most k,
i.e., arg maxS:|S|≤k f(S), where we interpret k as the budget for the promotional campaign. Though Kempe
et al. consider only the maximum coverage version of the viral marketing problem, their result in conjunction
with that of Wolsey (1982) also implies that the greedy algorithm will obtain a quota Q of value at a cost of
at most ln(Q) + 1 times the cost of the optimal set arg minS {c(S) : f(S) ≥Q} if f takes on only integral
values.
8.1 Adaptive Viral Marketing
The viral marketing problem has a very natural adaptive analog. Instead of selecting a ﬁxed set of people
in advance, we may select a person to offer the promotion to, make some observations about the resulting
spread of demand for our product, and repeat. See Fig. 3 for an illustration. In §8.2, we use the idea of
20

adaptive submodularity to obtain results analogous to those of Kempe et al. (2003) in the adaptive setting.
Speciﬁcally, we show that the greedy policy obtains at least
 1 −1
e

of the value of the best policy. Moreover,
we extend this result by achieving that guarantee not only for the case where our reward is simply the number
of inﬂuenced people, but also for any (nonnegative) monotone submodular function of the set of people
inﬂuenced. In §8.3 we consider the minimum cost cover objective, and show that the greedy policy obtains a
squared logarithmic approximation for it. To our knowledge, no approximation results for this adaptive variant
of the viral marketing problem have been known.
8.1.1 INDEPENDENT CASCADE MODEL
In this model, the social network is a directed graph G = (V, A) where each vertex in V is a person, and
each edge (u, v) ∈A has an associated binary random variable Xuv indicating if u will inﬂuence v. That is,
Xuv = 1 if u will inﬂuence v once it has been inﬂuenced, and Xuv = 0 otherwise. The random variables Xuv
are independent, and have known means puv := E [Xuv]. We will call an edge (u, v) with Xuv = 1 a live
edge and an edge with Xuv = 0 a dead edge. When a node u is activated, the edges Xuv to each neighbor
v of u are sampled, and v is activated if (u, v) is live. Inﬂuence can then spread from u’s neighbors to their
neighbors, and so on, according to the same process. Once active, nodes remain active throughout the process,
however Kempe et al. (2003) show that this assumption is without loss of generality, and can be removed.
8.1.2 THE FEEDBACK MODEL
In the Adaptive Viral Marketing problem under the independent cascades model, the items correspond to
people we can activate by offering them the promotional deal. How we deﬁne the states φ(u) depends on
what information we obtain as a result of activating u. Given the nature of the diffusion process, activating
u can have wide-ranging effects, so the state φ(u) has more to do with the state of the social network on
the whole than with u in particular. Speciﬁcally, we model φ(u) as a function φu : A →{0, 1, ?}, where
φu((u, v)) = 0 means that activating u has revealed that (u, v) is dead, φu((u, v)) = 1 means that activating
u has revealed that (u, v) is live, and φu((u, v)) = ? means that activating u has not revealed the status
of (u, v) (i.e., the value of Xuv). We require each realization to be consistent and complete. Consistency
means that no edge should be declared both live and dead by any two states. That is, for all u, v ∈V and
a ∈A, (φu(a), φv(a)) /∈{(0, 1), (1, 0)}. Completeness means that the status of each edge is revealed by
some activation. That is, for all a ∈A there exists u ∈V such that φu(a) ∈{0, 1}. A consistent and complete
realization thus encodes Xuv for each edge (u, v). Let A(φ) denote the live edges as encoded by φ. There are
several candidates for which edge sets we are allowed to observe when activating a node u. Here we consider
what we call the Full-Adoption Feedback Model: After activating u we get to see the status (live or dead) of all
edges exiting v, for all nodes v reachable from u via live edges (i.e., reachable from u in (V, A(φ)), where φ
is the true realization. We illustrate the full-adoption feedback model in Fig. 3.
8.1.3 THE OBJECTIVE FUNCTION
In the simplest case, the reward for inﬂuencing a set U ⊆V of nodes is ˆf(U) := |U|. Kempe et al. (2003)
obtain an
 1 −1
e

-approximation for the slightly more general case in which each node u has a weight wu
indicating its importance, and the reward is ˆf(U) := P
u∈U wu. We generalize this result further, to include
arbitrary nonnegative monotone submodular reward functions ˆf. This allows us, for example, to encode a value
associated with the diversity of the set of nodes inﬂuenced, such as the notion that it is better to achieve 20%
market penetration in ﬁve different (equally important) demographic segments than 100% market penetration
in one and 0% in the others.
8.2 Guarantees for the Maximum Coverage Objective
We are now ready to formally state our result for the maximum coverage objective.
21

Theorem 19 The greedy policy πgreedy obtains at least
 1 −1
e

of the value of the best policy for the Adaptive
Viral Marketing problem with arbitrary monotone submodular reward functions, in the independent cascade
and full-adoption feedback models discussed above. That is, if σ(S, φ) is the set of all activated nodes when S
is the seed set of activated nodes and φ is the realization, ˆf : 2V →R≥0 is an arbitrary monotone submodular
function indicating the reward for inﬂuencing a set, and the objective function is f(S, φ) := ˆf(σ(S, φ)), then
for all policies π and all k ∈N we have
favg(πgreedy
[k]
) ≥

1 −1
e

favg(π[k]).
More generally, if π is an α-approximate greedy policy then ∀ℓ∈N, favg(π[ℓ]) ≥
 1 −e−ℓ/αk
favg(π∗
[k]).
Proof Adaptive monotonicity follows immediately from the fact that f(·, φ) is monotonic for each φ. It thus
sufﬁces to prove that f is adaptive submodular with respect to the probability distribution on realizations p (φ),
because then we can invoke Theorem 5 to complete the proof.
We will say we have observed an edge (u, v) if we know its status, i.e., if it is live or dead. Fix any ψ, ψ′
such that ψ ⊆ψ′ and any v /∈dom(ψ′). We must show ∆(v|ψ′) ≤∆(v|ψ). To prove this rigorously, we de-
ﬁne a coupled distribution µ over pairs of realizations φ ∼ψ and φ′ ∼ψ′. Note that given the feedback model,
the realization φ is a function of the random variables {Xuw : (u, w) ∈A} indicating the status of each edge.
For conciseness we use the notation X = {Xuw : (u, w) ∈A}. We deﬁne µ implicitly in terms of a joint distri-
bution ˆµ on X × X′, where φ = φ(X) and φ′ = φ′(X′) are the realizations induced by the two distinct sets of
random edge statuses, respectively. Hence µ(φ(X), φ(X′)) = ˆµ(X, X′). Next, let us say a partial realization ψ
observes an edge e if some w ∈dom(ψ) has revealed its status as being live or dead. For edges (u, w) observed
by ψ, the random variable Xuw is deterministically set to the status observed by ψ. Similarly, for edges (u, w)
observed by ψ′, the random variable X′
uw is deterministically set to the status observed by ψ′. Note that since
ψ ⊆ψ′, the state of all edges which are observed by ψ are the same in φ and φ′. All (X, X′) ∈support(ˆµ)
have these properties. Additionally, we will construct ˆµ so that the status of all edges which are unobserved by
both ψ′ and ψ are the same in X and X′, meaning Xuw = X′
uw for all such edges (u, w), or else ˆµ(X, X′) = 0.
The above constraints leave us with the following degrees of freedom: we may select Xuw for all
(u, w) ∈A which are unobserved by ψ. We select them independently, such that E [Xuw] = puw as with the
prior p (φ). Hence for all (X, X′) satisfying the above constraints,
ˆµ(X, X′) =
Y
(u,w) unobserved by ψ
pXuw
uw
(1 −puw)1−Xuw ,
and otherwise ˆµ(X, X′) = 0. Note that p (φ | ψ) = P
φ′ µ(φ, φ′) and p (φ′ | ψ′) = P
φ µ(φ, φ′). We next
claim that for all (φ, φ′) ∈support(µ)
f(dom(ψ′) ∪{v} , φ′) −f(dom(ψ′), φ′)
≤
f(dom(ψ) ∪{v} , φ) −f(dom(ψ), φ).
(19)
Recall f(S, φ) := ˆf(σ(S, φ)), where σ(S, φ) is the set of all activated nodes when S is the seed set of activated
nodes and φ is the realization. Let B = σ(dom(ψ), φ) and C = σ(dom(ψ) ∪{v} , φ) denote the active nodes
before and after selecting v after dom(ψ) under realizations φ, and similarly deﬁne B′ and C′ with respect to ψ′
and φ′. Let D := C\B, D′ := C′\B′. Then Eq. (19) is equivalent to ˆf(B′∪D′)−ˆf(B′) ≤ˆf(B∪D)−ˆf(B).
By the submodularity of ˆf, it sufﬁces to show that B ⊆B′ and D′ ⊆D to prove the above inequality, which
we will now do.
We start by proving B ⊆B′. Fix w ∈B. Then there exists a path from some u ∈dom(ψ) to w in
(V, A(φ)). Moreover, every edge in this path is not only live but also observed to be live, by deﬁnition of the
feedback model. Since (φ, φ′) ∈support(µ), this implies that every edge in this path is also live under φ′, as
edges observed by ψ must have the same status under both φ and φ′. It follows that there is a path from u to w
in (V, A(φ′)). Since u is clearly also in dom(ψ′), we conclude w ∈B′, hence B ⊆B′.
Next we show D′ ⊆D. Fix some w ∈D′ and suppose by way of contradiction that w /∈D. Hence there
exists a path P from v to w in (V, A(φ′)) but no such path exists in (V, A(φ)). The edges of P are all live
22

under φ′, and at least one must be dead under φ. Let (u, u′) be such an edge in P. Because the status of this
edge differs in φ and φ′, and (φ, φ′) ∈support(µ), it must be that (u, u′) is observed by ψ′ but not observed
by ψ. Because it is observed by ψ′, in our feedback model it must be that u is active after dom(ψ′) is selected,
i.e., u ∈B′. However, this implies that all nodes reachable from u via edges in P are also active after dom(ψ′)
is selected, since all the edges in P are live. Hence all such nodes, including w, are in B′. Since D′ and B′ are
disjoint, this implies w /∈D′, a contradiction.
Having proved Eq. (19), we now proceed to use it to show ∆(v|ψ′) ≤∆(v|ψ) as in §6.
∆(v|ψ′)
=
P
(φ,φ′) µ(φ, φ′) (f(dom(ψ′) ∪{v} , φ′) −f(dom(ψ′), φ′))
≤
P
(φ,φ′) µ(φ, φ′) (f(dom(ψ) ∪{v} , φ) −f(dom(ψ), φ))
=
∆(v|ψ)
which completes the proof.
8.2.1 COMPARISON WITH STOCHASTIC SUBMODULAR MAXIMIZATION
It is worth contrasting the Adaptive Viral Marketing problem with the Stochastic Submodular Maximization
problem of §6. In the latter problem, we can think of the items as being random independently distributed sets.
In Adaptive Viral Marketing by contrast, the random sets (of nodes inﬂuenced when a ﬁxed node is selected)
depend on the random status of the edges, and hence may be correlated through them. Nevertheless, we can
obtain the same
 1 −1
e

approximation factor for both problems.
A Comment on the Myopic Feedback Model.
In the conference version of this article (Golovin and Krause,
2010), we considered an alternate feedback model called the myopic feedback model, in which after activating
v we see the status of all edges exiting v in the social network, i.e., ∂+(u) := {(u, v) : v ∈V } ∩A. We
claimed that the objective f as deﬁned previously is adaptive submodular in the independent cascade model
with myopic feedback, and hence the greedy policy obtains a (1 −1
e) approximation for it. We hereby retract
this claim, and furthermore give a counterexample demonstrating that f is not adaptive submodular under
myopic feedback.
Consider a graph G = (V, E) with vertices V := {u, v, w}, and edges E := {(u, v), (v, w)}. The
edge parameters are puv = 1 and pvw = 1 −ϵ. Let ˆf(U) = |U| and construct f from ˆf accordingly.
We let ψ = {(u, φu)}, where φu((u, v)) = 1 and φu((v, w)) = ?. Let ψ′ = {(u, φu), (v, φv)} where
φv((v, w)) = 0. Clearly, ψ ⊂ψ′. Note ∆(w|ψ) = ϵ, since the marginal beneﬁt of w over dom(ψ) is one
if (v, w) is dead, and zero if it is live, and the former occurs with probability ϵ. In contrast, ∆(w|ψ′) = 1,
since ψ′ contains the observation that (v, w) is dead. Hence ∆(w|ψ) < ∆(w|ψ′), which violates adaptive
submodularity. However, we conjecture that the greedy policy still obtains a constant factor approximation
even in the myopic feedback model.
8.3 The Minimum Cost Cover Objective
We may also wish to adaptively run our campaign until a certain level of market penetration has been achieved,
e.g., a certain number of people have adopted the product. We can formalize this goal using the minimum cost
cover objective. For this objective, we have an instance of Adaptive Stochastic Minimum Cost Cover, in which
we are given a quota Q ≤ˆf(V ) (quantifying the desired level of market penetration) and we must adaptively
select nodes to activate until the set of all active nodes S satisﬁes ˆf(S) ≥Q. We obtain the following result.
Theorem 20 Fix a monotone submodular function ˆf : 2V →R≥0 indicating the reward for inﬂuencing a set,
and a quota Q ≤ˆf(V ). Suppose the objective is f(S, φ) := min
n
Q, ˆf(σ(S, φ))
o
, where σ(S, φ) is the set
of all activated nodes when S is the seed set of activated nodes and φ is the realization. Let η be any value
such that ˆf(S) > Q −η implies ˆf(S) ≥Q for all S. Then any α-approximate greedy policy π on average
23

costs at most α

ln

Q
η

+ 1
2
times the average cost of the best policy obtaining Q reward for the Adaptive
Viral Marketing problem in the independent cascade model with full-adoption feedback as described above.
That is, cavg(π) ≤α

ln

Q
η

+ 1
2
cavg(π∗) for any π∗that covers every realization.
Proof We prove Theorem 20 by recourse to Theorem 13. We have already established that f is adaptive
submodular, in the proof of Theorem 19. It remains to show that f is strongly adaptive monotone and strongly
adaptive submodular, that these instances are self–certifying, and that Q and η equal the corresponding terms
in the statement of Theorem 13.
We start with strong adaptive monotonicity. Fix ψ, e /∈dom(ψ), and o ∈O. We must show
E [f(dom(ψ), Φ) | Φ ∼ψ] ≤E [f(dom(ψ) ∪{e} , Φ) | Φ ∼ψ, Φ(e) = o] .
(20)
Let V +(ψ) denote the active nodes after selecting dom(ψ) and observing ψ. By deﬁnition of the full adoption
feedback model, V +(ψ) consists of precisely those nodes v for which there exists a path Puv from some
u ∈dom(ψ) to v via exclusively live edges. The edges whose status we observe consist of all edges exiting
nodes in V +(ψ). It follows that every path from any u ∈V +(ψ) to any v ∈V \ V +(ψ) contains at least one
edge which is observed by ψ to be dead. Hence, in every φ ∼ψ, the set of nodes activated by selecting dom(ψ)
is the same. Therefore E [f(dom(ψ), Φ) | Φ ∼ψ] = ˆf(V +(ψ)). Similarly, if we deﬁne ψ′ := ψ ∪{(e, o)},
then E [f(dom(ψ) ∪{e} , Φ) | Φ ∼ψ, Φ(e) = o] = ˆf(V +(ψ′)). Note that once activated, nodes never
become inactive. Hence, ψ ⊆ψ′ implies V +(ψ) ⊆V +(ψ′). Since ˆf is monotone by assumption, this means
ˆf(V +(ψ)) ≤ˆf(V +(ψ′)) which implies Eq. (20) and strong adaptive monotonicity.
Next we establish strong adaptive submodularity. Given that we have already established adaptive
submodularity, it is sufﬁcient to also prove pointwise submodularity. For a ﬁxed realization φ we have a set of
live edges {(u, v) : Xuv = 1} which induce a set system in which u covers all nodes reachable from u via
live edges. Let Su denote this set. It is straightforward to verify that a monotone submodular function ˆf on
nodes induces a monotone submodular function on sets of those nodes. That is,
g(A) := ˆf (∪u∈ASu)
is submodular whenever ˆf is. In particular, g is submodular if for every A and B we have g(A) + g(B) ≥
g(A ∩B) + g(A ∪B) however one can easily verify that this set of constraints is a subset of the corresponding
submodularity constaints on ˆf.
Next we establish that these instances are self–certifying. Note that for every φ we have f(V, φ) =
min
n
Q, ˆf(V )
o
= Q. From our earlier remarks, we know that f(dom(ψ), φ) = ˆf(V +(ψ)) for every
φ ∼ψ. Hence for all ψ and φ, φ′ consistent with ψ, we have f(dom(ψ), φ) = f(dom(ψ), φ′) and so
f(dom(ψ), φ) = Q if and only if f(dom(ψ), φ′) = Q, which proves that the instance is self–certifying.
Finally we show that Q and η equal the corresponding terms in the statement of Theorem 13. As noted
earlier, f(V, φ) = Q for all φ. We deﬁned η as some value such that ˆf(S) > Q −η implies ˆf(S) ≥Q for all
S. Since range(f) =
n
min
n
Q, ˆf(S)
o
: S ⊆V
o
, it follows that we cannot have f(S, φ) ∈(Q −η, Q) for
any S and φ, so that η satisﬁes the requirements of the corresponding term in Theorem 13. Hence we may
apply Theorem 13 on this self–certifying instance with Q and η to obtain the claimed result.
9. Application: Automated Diagnosis and Active Learning
An important problem in AI is automated diagnosis. For example, suppose we have different hypotheses about
the state of a patient, and can run medical tests to rule out inconsistent hypotheses. The goal is to adaptively
choose tests to infer the state of the patient as quickly as possible.
A similar problem arises in active learning. Obtaining labeled data to train a classiﬁer is typically expensive,
as it often involves asking an expert. In active learning (c.f. Cohn et al. (1996); McCallum and Nigam (1998)),
24

Figure 4: Illustration of the Active Learning problem, in the simple special case of one-dimensional data and
binary threshold hypotheses H = {hτ : τ ∈R}, where hτ(x) = 1 if x ≥τ and 0 otherwise.
the key idea is that some labels are more informative than others: labeling a few unlabeled examples can imply
the labels of many other unlabeled examples, and thus the cost of obtaining the labels from an expert can be
avoided. As is standard, we assume that we are given a set of hypotheses H, and a set of unlabeled data points
X where each x ∈X is independently drawn from some distribution D. Let L be the set of possible labels.
Classical learning theory yields probably approximately correct (PAC) bounds, bounding the number n of
examples drawn i.i.d. from D needed to output a hypothesis h that will have expected error at most ε with
probability at least 1 −δ, for some ﬁxed ε, δ > 0. That is, if h∗is the target hypothesis (with zero error),
and error(h) := Px∼D [h(x) ̸= h∗(x)] is the error of h, we require P [error(h) ≤ε] ≥1 −δ. The latter
probability is taken with respect to D(X); the learned hypothesis h and thus error(h) depend on it. A key
challenge in active learning is to avoid bias: actively selected examples are no longer i.i.d., and thus sample
complexity bounds for passive learning no longer apply. If one is not careful, active learning may require more
samples than passive learning to achieve the same generalization error. One natural approach to active learning
that is guaranteed to perform at least as well as passive learning is pool-based active learning (McCallum and
Nigam, 1998): The idea is to draw n unlabeled examples i.i.d. However, instead of obtaining all labels, labels
are adaptively requested until the labels of all unlabeled examples are implied by the obtained labels. Now we
have obtained n labeled examples drawn i.i.d., and classical PAC bounds still apply. The key question is how
to request the labels for the pool to infer the remaining labels as quickly as possible.
In the case of binary labels (or test outcomes) L = {−1, 1}, various authors have considered greedy
policies which generalize binary search (Garey and Graham, 1974; Loveland, 1985; Arkin et al., 1993;
Kosaraju et al., 1999; Dasgupta, 2004; Guillory and Bilmes, 2009; Nowak, 2009). The simplest of these,
called generalized binary search (GBS) or the splitting algorithm, works as follows. Deﬁne the version
space V to be the set of hypotheses consistent with the observed labels (here we assume that there is no
label noise). In the worst-case setting, GBS selects a query x ∈X that minimizes
P
h∈V h(x)
. In the
Bayesian setting we assume we are given a prior pH over hypotheses; in this case GBS selects a query
x ∈X that minimizes
P
h∈V pH(h) · h(x)
. Intuitively these policies myopically attempt to shrink a
measure of the version space (i.e., the cardinality or the probability mass) as quickly as possible. The former
provides an O(log |H|)-approximation for the worst-case number of queries (Arkin et al., 1993), and the
latter provides an O(log
1
minh pH(h))-approximation for the expected number of queries (Kosaraju et al.,
1999; Dasgupta, 2004) and a natural generalization of GBS obtains the same guarantees with a larger set
of labels (Guillory and Bilmes, 2009). Kosaraju et al. also prove that running GBS on a modiﬁed prior
p′
H(h) ∝max

pH(h), 1/|H|2 log |H|
	
is sufﬁcient to obtain an O(log |H|)-approximation.
Viewed from this perspective of the previous sections, shrinking the version space amounts to “covering”
all false hypotheses with stochastic sets (i.e., queries), where query x covers all hypotheses that disagree with
the target hypothesis h∗at x. That is, x covers {h : h(x) ̸= h∗(x)}. As in §8, these sets may be correlated in
complex ways determined by the set of possible hypotheses. As we will show, the reduction in version space
mass is adaptive submodular, and this allows us to obtain a new analysis of GBS using adaptive submodularity,
25

which has a weaker approximation guarantee than is optimal, but is arguably more amenable to extensions and
generalizations than previous analyses.
Theorem 21 In the Bayesian setting in which there is a prior pH on a ﬁnite set of hypotheses H, the
generalized binary search algorithm makes OPT ·

ln

1
minh pH(h)

+ 1
2
queries in expectation to identify
a hypothesis drawn from pH, where OPT is the minimum expected number of queries made by any policy. If
minh pH(h) is sufﬁciently small, running the algorithm on a modiﬁed prior p′
H(h) ∝max

pH(h), 1/|H|2	
improves the approximation factor to O

(ln |H|)2
.
We devote the better part of the remainder of this section to the proof of Theorem 21, which has several
components. We ﬁrst address the important special case of a uniform prior over hypotheses, i.e., pH(h) =
1/|H| for all h ∈H, and then we reduce the case with a general prior to a uniform prior. We wish to appeal to
Theorem 13, so we convert the problem into an Adaptive Stochastic Min Cost Cover problem.
9.1 The Reduction to Adaptive Stochastic Min Cost Cover
Deﬁne a realization φh for each hypothesis h ∈H. The ground set is E = X, and the outcomes are binary;
we deﬁne O = {−1, 1} instead of using {0, 1} to be consistent with our earlier exposition. For all h ∈H
we set φh ≡h, meaning φh(x) = h(x) for all x ∈X. To deﬁne the objective function, we ﬁrst need some
notation. Given observed labels ψ ⊂X × O, let V (ψ) denote the version space, i.e., the set of hypotheses for
which h(x) = ψ(x) for all x ∈dom(ψ). See Fig. 4 for an illustration of an active learning problem in the
case of indicator hypotheses. For a set of hypotheses V , let pH(V ) := P
h∈V pH(h) denote their total prior
probability. Finally, let ψ(S, h) = {(x, h(x)) : x ∈S} be the function with domain S that agrees with h on
S. We deﬁne the objective function by
f(S, φh) := 1 −pH(V (ψ(S, h))) = pH({h′ : ∃x ∈S, h′(x) ̸= h(x)})
and use p (φh) = pH(h) = 1/|H| for all h. Let π∗be an optimal policy for this Adaptive Stochastic Min
Cost Cover instance. Note that there is an exact correspondence between policies for the original problem of
ﬁnding the target hypothesis and our problem of covering the true realization; h∗is identiﬁed as the target
hypothesis if and only if the version space is reduced to {h∗} which occurs if and only if φh∗is covered.
Hence cavg(π∗) = OPT. Note that because we have assumed a uniform prior over hypotheses, we have
f(X, φh) = 1 −1/|H| for all h. Furthermore, the instances are self–certifying.
Lemma 22 The instances described above are self–certifying for arbitrary priors pH.
Proof Intuitively, theses instances are self–certifying because to cover φh∗a policy must identify φh∗. More
formally, these instances are self–certifying because for any φh and ψ such that φh ∼ψ, we have that
f(dom(ψ), φh) = f(X, φh) implies V (ψ) = {h}. This in turn means that φh is the only realization consis-
tent with ψ, which trivially implies that any realization φ′ ∼ψ also has f(dom(ψ), φ′) = f(X, φ′); hence the
instance is self–certifying.
9.2 The Uniform Prior
We next prove that the instances generated are adaptive submodular and strongly adaptive monotone under a
uniform prior.
Lemma 23 In the instances described above, f is strongly adaptive monotone and strongly adaptive submod-
ular and with respect to a uniform prior pH.
26

Proof Demonstrating strong adaptive monotonicity under a uniform prior amounts to proving that adding
labels cannot grow the version space, which is clear in our model. That is, each query x eliminates some subset
of hypotheses, and as more queries are performed, the subset of hypotheses eliminated by x cannot grow.
Moving on to adaptive submodularity, consider the expected marginal contribution of x under two partial
realizations ψ, ψ′ where ψ is a subrealization of ψ′ (i.e., ψ ⊂ψ′), and x /∈dom(ψ′). Let ψ[x/o] be the partial
realization with domain dom(ψ) ∪{x} that agrees with ψ on its domain, and maps x to o. For each o ∈O, let
ao := pH(V (ψ[x/o])), bo := pH(V (ψ′[x/o])). Since a hypothesis eliminated from the version space cannot
later appear in the version space, we have ao ≥bo for all o. Next, note the expected reduction in version space
mass (and hence the expected marginal contribution) due to selecting x given partial realization ψ is
∆(x|ψ) =
X
o∈O
ao · P [Φ(x) ̸= o | Φ ∼ψ] =
X
o
ao
P
o′̸=o ao′
P
o′ ao′

=
P
o̸=o′ aoao′
P
o′ ao′
.
(21)
The corresponding quantity for ψ′ has bo substituted for ao in Eq. (21), for each o ∈O. To prove adaptive
submodularity we must show ∆(x|ψ) ≥∆(x|ψ′) and to do so it sufﬁces to show that ∂φ/∂zo ≥0 for each
o and ⃗z ∈

⃗c ∈[0, 1]O : P
o co > 0
	
, where φ(⃗z ) :=
P
o̸=o′ zozo′

/ (P
o′ zo′) has the same functional
form as the expression for ∆(x|ψ) in Eq. (21). This is because ∂φ/∂zo ≥0 for each o implies that growing
the version space in any manner cannot decrease the expected marginal beneﬁt of query x, and hence shrinking
it in any manner cannot increase the expected marginal beneﬁt of x. It is indeed the case that ∂φ/∂zo ≥0 for
each o. More speciﬁcally, it holds that
∂φ
∂za
=
P
b̸=a z2
b + P
(b,c):b̸=c,b̸=a,c̸=a zbzc
(P
b zb)2
≥0,
which can be derived through elementary calculus.
To further show strong adaptive submodularity, we prove pointwise submodularity of the objective. For
any ﬁxed realization, h, the objective S 7→f(S, φ) amounts to a weighted set cover problem on the incorrect
hypotheses (plus a constant), and is thus submodular.
Hence we can apply Theorem 13 to this self–certifying instance with maximum reward threshold Q =
1−1/|H|, and minimum gap η = 1/|H|, to obtain an upper bound of OPT (ln (|H| −1) + 1)2 on the number
of queries made by the generalized binary search algorithm (which corresponds exactly to the greedy policy
for Adaptive Stochastic Min Cost Cover) under the assumption of a uniform prior over H.
9.3 Arbitrary Priors
Now consider general priors over H. We construct the Adaptive Stochastic Min Cost Cover instance as before,
only we change the objective function to
f(S, φh) := 1 −pH(V (ψ(S, h))) + pH(h).
(22)
First note that the instances remain self–certifying. The proof of Lemma 22 goes through completely unchanged
by the modiﬁcation of f. We proceed to show adaptive submodularity and strong adaptive monotonicity.
Lemma 24 The objective function f as described in Eq. (22) is strongly adaptive monotone and strongly
adaptive submodular with respect to arbitrary priors pH.
Proof The modiﬁed objective is still adaptive submodular, because (S, φh) 7→pH(h) is clearly so, and
because adaptive submodularity is deﬁned via linear inequalities it is preserved under taking nonnegative
linear combinations. Note that f(X, φh) = 1 for all φh. It is still strongly adaptive submodular, because it is
still pointwise submodular.
27

Showing f is strongly adaptive monotone requires slightly more work than before. Fix ψ, x /∈dom(ψ),
and o ∈O. We must show
E [f(dom(ψ), Φ) | Φ ∼ψ] ≤E [f(dom(ψ) ∪{x} , Φ) | Φ ∼ψ, Φ(x) = o] .
(23)
Plugging in the deﬁnition of f, the inequality we wish to prove may be simpliﬁed to
E [pH(Φ) | Φ ∼ψ] −E [pH(Φ) | Φ ∼ψ[x/o]] ≤pH(V (ψ)) −pH(V (ψ[x/o])).
(24)
where Φ is the random realization of the hypothesis, and pH(φh) = pH(h) for all h. Let Velim := V (ψ) −
V (ψ[x/o]) be the set of hypotheses eliminated from the version space by the observation h(x) = o. Rewriting
Eq. (24), we get
X
h∈V (ψ)
pH(h)2
pH(V (ψ)) −
X
h∈V (ψ[x/o])
pH(h)2
pH(V (ψ[x/o])) ≤pH(Velim).
(25)
Let LHS25 denote the left hand side of Eq. (25). We prove Eq. (25) as follows.
LHS25
≤
P
h∈Velim pH(h)2/pH(V (ψ))
[since pH(V (ψ[x/o])) ≤pH(V (ψ))]
≤
P
h∈Velim pH(h) · pH(V (ψ))/pH(V (ψ))
[since h ∈V (ψ) ⇒pH(h) ≤pH(V (ψ))]
=
pH(Velim)
We conclude that f is adaptive submodular and strongly adaptive monotone.
Hence we can apply Theorem 13 to this self–certifying instance with maximum reward threshold Q = 1,
and minimum gap η = 1/ minh pH(h). As a result we obtain an upper bound of OPT (ln (1/ minh pH(h)) + 1)2
on the number of queries made by generalized binary search for arbitrary priors, completing the proof of
Theorem 21.
9.4 Improving the Approximation Factor for Highly Nonuniform Priors
To improve this to an O

(log |H|)2
-approximation in the event that minh pH(h) is extremely small using
the observation of Kosaraju et al. (1999), call a policy π progressive if it eliminates at least one hypothesis
from its version space in each query. Let p′
H(h) = max

pH(h), 1/|H|2	
/Z be the modiﬁed prior, where
Z := P
h′ max

pH(h′), 1/|H|2	
is the normalizing constant. Let c(π, h) be the cost (i.e., # of queries)
of π under target h. Then cavg(π, p) := P
h c(π, h)p(h) is the expected cost of π under prior p. We will
show that cavg(π, p′
H) is a good approximation to cavg(π, pH). Call h rare if pH(h) < 1/|H|2, and common
otherwise. First, note that P
h′ max

pH(h′), 1/|H|2	
≤1 + 1/|H|, and so p′
H(h) ≥
|H|
|H|+1pH(h), for all
h. Hence for all π, we have cavg(π, p′
H) ≥
|H|
|H|+1cavg(π, pH). Next, we show cavg(π, p′
H) ≤cavg(π, pH) + 1.
Consider the quantity cavg(π, p′
H) −cavg(π, pH) = P
h c(π, h) (p′
H(h) −pH(h)). The positive contributions
must come from rare hypotheses. However, the total probability mass of these under p′
H is at most 1/|H|,
and since π is progressive c(π, h) ≤|H| for all h, hence the difference in costs is at most one. Let
α :=

ln

1
minh p′
H(h)

+ 1
2
≤
 ln
 |H|2 + |H|

+ 1
2 be the approximation factor for generalized binary
search when run on p′
H. Let π be the policy of generalized binary search, and let π∗be an optimal policy
under prior pH. Then
cavg(π, pH) ≤|H| + 1
|H|
cavg(π, p′
H) ≤|H| + 1
|H|
α cavg(π∗, p′
H) ≤|H| + 1
|H|
α (cavg(π∗, pH) + 1) .
Thus for a general prior a simple modiﬁcation of GBS yields an O

(log |H|)2
-approximation.
28

9.5 Extensions to Arbitrary Costs, Multiple Classes, and Approximate Greedy Policies
This result easily generalizes to handle the setting of multiple classes / test outcomes (i.e., |O| ≥2), and
α-approximate greedy policies, where we lose a factor of α in the approximation factor. As we describe in the
Appendix, we can generalize adaptive submodularity to incorporate costs on items, which allows us to extend
this result to handle query costs as well. Recently, Gupta et al. (2010) showed how to simultaneously remove
the dependence on both costs and probabilities from the approximation ratio. Speciﬁcally, within the context
of studying an adaptive travelling salesman problem they investigated the Optimal Decision Tree problem,
which is equivalent to the active learning problem we consider here. Using a clever, more complex algorithm
than adaptive greedy, they achieve an O (log |H|)-approximation in the case of non-uniform costs and general
priors.
9.6 Extensions to Active Learning with Noisy Observations
Theorem 21 and the extensions mentioned so far are in the noise free case, i.e., the result of query x and
observes h∗(x), where h∗is the target hypothesis. Many practical problems may have noisy observations.
Nowak (2009) considered the case in which the outcomes are binary, i.e., O = {−1, 1}, the same query may
be asked multiple times, and for each instance of each query the noise is independent. In this case he gives
performance guarantees for generalized binary search. While this setting may be appropriate if the noise is
due to measurement error, in some applications the noise is persistent, i.e., if query x is asked several times,
the observation is always the same. Recently, Golovin et al. (2010) and Bellala and Scott (2010) have used
the adaptive submodularity framework to obtain the ﬁrst algorithms with provable (squared–logarithmic)
approximation guarantees for active learning with persistent noise.
10. Experiments
Greedy algorithms are often straightforward to develop and implement, which explains their popular use in
practical applications, such as Bayesian experimental design and Active Learning, as discussed in §9 (also
see the excellent introduction of Nowak (2009)) and Adaptive Stochastic Set Cover, e.g., for ﬁlter design
in streaming databases as discussed in §7. Besides allowing us to prove approximation guarantees for such
algorithms, adaptive submodularity provides the following immediate practical beneﬁts:
1. The ability to use lazy evaluations to speed up its execution.
2. The ability to generate data-dependent bounds on the optimal value.
In this section, we empirically evaluate their beneﬁts within a sensor selection application, in a setting similar
to the one described by Deshpande et al. (2004). In this application, we have deployed a network V of
wireless sensors, e.g., to monitor temperature in a building or trafﬁc in a road network. Since sensors are
battery constrained, we must adaptively select k sensors, and then, given those sensor readings, predict,
e.g., the temperature at all remaining locations. This prediction is possible since temperature measurements
will typically be correlated across space. Here, we will consider the case where sensors can fail to report
measurements due to hardware failures, environmental conditions or interference.
10.1 The Sensor Selection Problem with Unreliable Sensors
More formally, we imagine every location v ∈V is associated with a random variable Xv describing the
temperature at that location, and there is a joint probability distribution p (xV ) := P [XV = xV ] that models the
correlation between temperature values. Here, XV = [X1, . . . , Xn] is the random vector over all temperature
values. We follow Deshpande et al. (2004) and assume that the joint distribution of the sensors is multivariate
Gaussian. A sensor v can make a noisy observation Yv = Xv + εv, where εv is zero mean Gaussian noise with
known variance σ2. If some measurements YA = yA are obtained at a subset of locations, then the conditional
distribution p (xV | yA) := P [XV = xV | YA = yA] allows predictions at the unobserved locations, e.g.,
by predicting E[XV | YA = yA] (which minimizes the mean squared error). Furthermore, this conditional
distribution quantiﬁes the uncertainty in the prediction: Intuitively, we would like to select sensors that
29

minimize the predictive uncertainty. One way to quantify the predictive uncertainty is to use the remaining
Shannon entropy
H (XV | YA = yA) := E [−log2 (p (XV | yA))] .
We would like to adaptively select k sensors, to maximize the expected reduction in Shannon entropy (c.f. Se-
bastiani and Wynn (2000); Krause and Guestrin (2009a)). However, in practice, sensors are often unreliable,
and might fail to report their measurements. We assume that after selecting a sensor, we ﬁnd out whether it
has failed or not before deciding which sensor to select next. We suppose that each sensor has an associated
probability pfail(v) of failure, in which case no reading is reported, and that sensor failures are independent
of each other and of the ambient temperature at v. Thus we have an instance of the Stochastic Maximization
problem with E := V , O := {working, failed}, and
f(A, φ) := H (XV ) −H
 XV | y{v : φ(v)=working}

.
(26)
For multivariate normal distributions, the entropy is given as
H (XV | YA = yA) = 1
2 ln(2πe)n ΣV A
 ΣAA + σ2I
−1 ΣAV
 ,
where for sets A and B, ΣAB denotes the covariance (matrix) between random vectors XA and XB. Note that
the predictive covariance does not depend on the actual observations yA, only on the set A of chosen locations.
Thus,
H (XV | YA = yA) = H (XV | YA) ,
where as usual, H (XV | YA) = E [H (XV | YA = yA)]. As Krause and Guestrin (2005) show, the function
g(A) := I (XV ; YA) = H (XV ) −H (XV | YA)
(27)
is monotone submodular, whenever the observations YV are conditionally independent given XV .
This insight allows us to apply the result of §6 to show that the objective f deﬁned in Eq. (26) is adaptive
monotone submodular, using ˆf(S) := g({v : (v, working) ∈S}) for any S ⊆E × O.
10.1.1 DATA AND EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Our ﬁrst data set consists of temperature measurements from the network of 46 sensors deployed at Intel
Research Berkeley, which were sampled at 30 second intervals for 5 consecutive days (starting Feb. 28th,
2004). We deﬁne our objective function with respect to the empirical covariance estimated from the data.
We also use data from trafﬁc sensors deployed along the highway I-880 South in California. We use trafﬁc
speed data for all working days from 6 AM to 11 AM for one month, from 357 sensors. The goal is to predict
the speed on all 357 road segments. We again estimate the empirical covariance matrix.
10.1.2 THE BENEFITS OF LAZY EVALUATION
For both data sets, we run the adaptive greedy algorithm, using both the naive implementation (Algorithm 1)
and the accelerated version using lazy evaluations (Algorithm 2). We vary the probability of sensor failure,
and evaluate the execution time and the number of evaluations of the function g (deﬁned in Eq. (27)) each
algorithm makes. Figures 5(a) and 5(b) plot execution time given a 50% sensor failure rate, on a computer
with a 2.26 GHz dual core processor and 4 GB RAM. In these applications, function evaluations are the
bottleneck in the computation, so the number of them serves as a machine-independent proxy for the running
time. Figures 5(c) and 5(d) show the performance ratio in terms of this proxy. On the temperature data set,
lazy evaluations speed up the computation by a factor of between roughly 3.5 and 7, depending on the failure
probability. On the larger trafﬁc data set, we obtain speedup factors between 30 and 38. We ﬁnd that the
beneﬁt of the lazy evaluations increases with the problem size and with the failure probability. The dependence
on problem size must ultimately be explained in terms of structural properties of the instances, which also
beneﬁt the nonadaptive accelerated greedy algorithm. The dependence on failure probability has a simpler
30

explanation. Note that in these applications, if the accelerated greedy algorithm selects v, which then fails,
then it does not need to make any additional function evaluations to select the next sensor. Contrast this with
the naive greedy algorithm, which makes a function evaluation for each sensor that has not been selected so
far.
10.1.3 THE BENEFITS OF THE DATA DEPENDENT BOUND
While adaptive submodularity allows us to prove worst-case performance guarantees for the adaptive greedy
algorithm, in many practical applications it can be expected that these bounds are quite loose. For our sensor
selection application, we use the data dependent bounds of Lemma 6 to compute an upper bound βavg on
maxπ favg(π[k]) as described below, and compare it with the performance guarantee of Theorem 5. For the
accelerated greedy algorithm, we use the upper bounds on the marginal beneﬁts stored in the priority queue
instead of recomputing the marginal beneﬁts, and thus expect somewhat looser bounds. We ﬁnd that for our
application, the bounds are tighter than the worst case bounds. We also ﬁnd that the “lazy” data dependent
bounds are almost as tight as the “eager” bounds using the eagerly recomputed marginal beneﬁts ∆(e|ψ)
for the latest and greatest ψ, though the former have slightly higher variance. Figures 5(e) and 5(f) show the
performance of the greedy algorithm as well as the three bounds on the optimal value.
Two subtleties arise when using the data-dependent bounds to bound maxπ favg(π[k]). The ﬁrst is that
Lemma 6 tells us that ∆

π∗
[k] |ψ

≤maxA⊆E,|A|≤k
P
e∈A ∆(e|ψ), whereas we would like to bound the
difference between the optimal reward and the algorithm’s current expected reward, conditioned on seeing
ψ, i.e., E
h
f(E(π∗
[k], Φ), Φ) −f(dom(ψ), Φ) | Φ ∼ψ
i
. However, in our applications f is strongly adaptive
monotone, and strong adaptive monotonicity implies that for any π∗we have
E
h
f(E(π∗
[k], Φ), Φ) −f(dom(ψ), Φ) | Φ ∼ψ
i
≤∆

π∗
[k] |ψ

.
(28)
Hence, if we let OPT(ψ) := maxπ E

f(E(π[k], Φ), Φ) | Φ ∼ψ

, Lemma 6 implies that
OPT(ψ) ≤E [f(dom(ψ), Φ) | Φ ∼ψ] +
max
A⊆E,|A|≤k
X
e∈A
∆(e|ψ) .
(29)
The second subtlety is that we obtain a sequence of bounds from Eq. (29). If we consider the (random)
sequence of partial realizations observed by the adaptive greedy algorithm, ∅= ψ0 ⊂ψ1 ⊂· · · ⊂ψk, we
obtain k+1 bounds β0, . . . , βk, where βi := E [f(dom(ψi), Φ) | Φ ∼ψi]+maxA⊆E,|A|≤k
P
e∈A ∆(e|ψi).
Taking the expectation over Φ, note that for any π, and any i,
favg(π[k]) ≤E [OPT(ψi)] ≤E [βi] .
Therefore for any 0 ≤i ≤k , βi is a random variable whose expectation is an upper bound on the
optimal expected reward of any policy. At this point we may be tempted to use the minimum of these, i.e.,
βmin := mini {βi} as our ultimate bound. However, a collection of random variables X0, . . . , Xk with
E [Xi] ≥τ for all i does not, in general, satisfy mini {Xi} ≥τ. While it is possible in our case, with its
independent sensor failures, to use concentration inequalities to bound mini {βi} −mini {E [βi]} with high
probability, and thus add an appropriate term to obtain a true upper bound from βmin, we take a different
approach; we simply use the average bound βavg :=
1
k+1
Pk
i=0 βi. Of course, depending on the application, a
particular bound βi (chosen independently of the sequence ψ0, ψ1, . . . , ψk) may be superior. For example,
if g is modular, then β0 is best, whereas if g exhibits strong diminishing returns, then bounds βi with larger
values of i may be signiﬁcantly tighter.
11. Adaptivity Gap
An important question in adaptive optimization is how much better adaptive policies can perform when
compared to non-adaptive policies. This is quantiﬁed by the adaptivity gap, which is the worst-case ratio, over
31

0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
Time for Standard and Accelerated Adaptive Greedy
Accelerated Adaptive Greedy
Adaptive Greedy
(a) Temperature Data: Execution time (sec) for the naive
vs accelerated implementations of adaptive greedy vs. the
budget k on number of sensors selected, when pfail(v) =
0.5 for all v, plotted with standard errors.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Time for Standard and Accelerated Adaptive Greedy
Adaptive Greedy
Accelerated Adaptive Greedy
(b) Trafﬁc Data: Execution time (sec) for the naive
vs accelerated implementations of adaptive greedy
vs. the budget k on number of sensors selected, when
pfail(v) = 0.5 for all v, plotted with standard errors.
0
10
20
30
40
50
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Reduction in Function Evaluations vs. Pr[failure]
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
(c) Temperature Data: The ratio of function evaluations
made by the naive vs accelerated implementations of
adaptive greedy vs. the budget k on number of sensors
selected, for various failure rates. Averaged over 100
runs.
0
100
200
300
400
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50%
25%
75%
Reduction in Function Evaluations vs. Pr[failure]
(d) Trafﬁc Data: The ratio of function evaluations made
by the naive vs accelerated implementations of adaptive
greedy vs. the budget k on number of sensors selected,
for various failure rates. Averaged over 10 runs.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Reward for Adaptive Greedy, with Data−Dependent Bounds
Adaptive Greedy
Standard Bound
Lazy Adaptive Bound
Adaptive Bound
(e) Temperature Data: Rewards & bounds on the optimal
value when pfail(v) = 0.5 for all v vs. the budget k on
number of sensors selected, plotted with standard errors.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
0
50
100
150
Reward for Adaptive Greedy, with Data−Dependent Bounds
Adaptive Greedy
Standard Bound
Lazy Adaptive Bound
Adaptive Bound
(f) Trafﬁc Data: Rewards & bounds on the optimal value
when pfail(v) = 0.5 for all v vs. the budget k on number
of sensors selected, plotted with standard errors.
Figure 5: Experimental results.
32

problem instances, of the performance of the optimal adaptive policy to the optimal non-adaptive solution.
Asadpour et al. (2008) show that in the Stochastic Submodular Maximization problem with independent
failures (as considered in §6), the expected value of the optimal non-adaptive policy is at most a constant
factor 1 −1/e worse than the expected value of the optimal adaptive policy. While we currently do not
have lower bounds for the adaptivity gap of the general Adaptive Stochastic Maximization problem (1), we
can show that even in the case of adaptive submodular functions, the min-cost cover and min-sum cover
versions have large adaptivity gaps, and thus there is a large beneﬁt of using adaptive algorithms. In these
cases, the adaptivity gap is deﬁned as the worst-case ratio of the expected cost of the optimal non-adaptive
policy divided by the expected cost of the optimal adaptive policy. For the Adaptive Stochastic Minimum Cost
Coverage problem (2), Goemans and Vondr´ak (2006) show the special case of Stochastic Set Coverage without
multiplicities has an adaptivity gap of Ω(|E|). Below we exhibit an adaptive stochastic optimization instance
with adaptivity gap of Ω(|E|/ log |E|) for the Adaptive Stochastic Min-Sum Cover problem (3), which also
happens to have the same adaptivity gap for Adaptive Stochastic Minimum Cost Coverage.
Theorem 25 Even for adaptive submodular functions, the adaptivity gap of Adaptive Stochastic Min-Sum
Cover is Ω(n/ log n), where n = |E|.
Proof Suppose E = {1, . . . , n}. Consider the active learning problem where our hypotheses h : E →{−1, 1}
are threshold functions, i.e., h(e) = 1 if e ≥ℓand h(e) = −1 if e < ℓfor some threshold ℓ. There is a
uniform distribution over thresholds ℓ∈{1, . . . , n + 1}. In order to identify the correct hypothesis with
threshold ℓ, our policy must observe at least one of ℓ−1 or ℓ(and both of them if 1 < ℓ≤n). Let ˆπ
be an optimal non-adaptive policy for this problem. Note that ˆπ can be represented as a permutation of
E, because observing an element multiple times can only increase the cost while providing no beneﬁt over
observing it once, and each element must eventually be selected to guarantee coverage. For the min-sum cover
objective, consider playing ˆπ for n/4 time steps. Then P [ℓobserved in n/4 steps] = n/4(n + 1). Likewise
P [ℓ−1 observed in n/4 steps] = n/4(n + 1). Since at least one of these events must occur to identify the
correct hypothesis, by a union bound
P [ˆπ identiﬁes the correct hypothesis in n/4 steps]
≤
n
2(n + 1)
≤
1/2.
Thus a lower bound on the expected cost of ˆπ is n/8, since for n/4 time steps a cost of at least 1/2 is incurred.
Thus, for both the min-cost and min-sum cover objectives the cost of the optimal non-adaptive policy is Ω(n).
As an example adaptive policy, we can implement a natural binary search strategy, which is guaranteed to
identify the correct hypothesis after O(log n) steps, thus incurring cost O(log n), proving an adaptivity gap of
Ω(n/ log n).
12. Hardness of Approximation
In this paper, we have developed the notion of adaptive submodularity, which characterizes when certain
adaptive stochastic optimization problems are well-behaved in the sense that a simple greedy policy obtains a
constant factor or polylogarithmic factor approximation to the best policy.
In contrast, we can also show that without adaptive submodularity, the adaptive stochastic optimization
problems (1), (2), and (3) are extremely inapproximable, even with (pointwise) modular objective functions
(i.e., those where for each φ, f : 2E × OE →R is modular/linear in the ﬁrst argument): We cannot hope
to achieve an O(|E|1−ε) approximation ratio for these problems, unless the polynomial hierarchy collapses
down to ΣP
2 .
Theorem 26 For all (possibly non-constant) β ≥1, no polynomial time algorithm for Adaptive Stochastic
Maximization with a budget of βk items can approximate the reward of an optimal policy with a budget of
only k items to within a multiplicative factor of O(|E|1−ε/β) for any ε > 0, unless PH = ΣP
2 . This holds
even for pointwise modular f.
33

We provide the proof of Theorem 26 in Appendix 15.7. Note that by setting β = 1, we obtain O(|E|1−ε)
hardness for Adaptive Stochastic Maximization. It turns out that in the instance distribution we construct in
the proof of Theorem 26 the optimal policy covers every realization (i.e., always ﬁnds the treasure) using a
budget of k = O(|E|ε/2) items. Hence if PH ̸= ΣP
2 then any randomized polynomial time algorithm wishing
to cover this instance must have a budget β = Ω(|E|1−ε) times larger than the optimal policy, in order to
ensure the ratio of rewards, which is Ω(|E|1−ε/β), equals one. This yields the following corollary.
Corollary 27 No polynomial time algorithm for Adaptive Stochastic Min Cost Coverage can approximate the
cost of an optimal policy to within a multiplicative factor of O(|E|1−ε) for any ε > 0, unless PH = ΣP
2 . This
holds even for pointwise modular f.
Furthermore, since in the instance distribution we construct the optimal policy π∗covers every realization
using a budget of k, it has cΣ(π∗) ≤k. Moreover, since we have shown that under our complexity theoretic
assumptions, any polynomial time randomized policy π with budget βk achieves at most o(β/|E|1−ε) of the
(unit) value obtained by the optimal policy with budget k, it follows that cΣ(π) = Ω(βk). Since we require
β = Ω(|E|1−ε) to cover any set of realizations constituting, e.g., half of the probability mass, we obtain the
following corollary.
Corollary 28 No polynomial time algorithm for Adaptive Stochastic Min-Sum Cover can approximate the
cost of an optimal policy to within a multiplicative factor of O(|E|1−ε) for any ε > 0, unless PH = ΣP
2 . This
holds even for pointwise modular f.
13. Related Work
There is a large literature on adaptive optimization under partial observability which relates to adaptive
submodularity, which can be broadly organized into several different categories. Here, we only review relevant
related work that is not already discussed elsewhere in the manuscript.
13.1 Adaptive Versions of Classic Non-adaptive Optimization Problems
Many approaches consider stochastic generalizations of speciﬁc classic non-adaptive optimization problems,
such as Set Cover (Goemans and Vondr´ak, 2006; Liu et al., 2008), Knapsack (Dean et al., 2008, 2005) and
Traveling Salesman (Gupta et al., 2010). In contrast, in this paper our goal is to introduce a general problem
structure – adaptive submodularity – that uniﬁes a number of adaptive optimization problems. This is similar
to how the classic notion of submodularity uniﬁes various optimization problems such as Set Cover, Facility
Location, nonadaptive Bayesian Experimental Design, etc.
13.2 Competitive Online Optimization
Another active area of research in sequential optimization is the study of competitive online algorithms. A
particularly relevant example is Online Set Cover Alon et al. (2009), where there is a known set system, an
arbitrary sequence of elements is presented to the algorithm, and the algorithm must irrevocably select sets to
purchase such that at all times the purchased sets cover all elements which have appeared so far. Alon et al.
(2009) obtain a polylogarithmic approximation to this problem, via an online primal–dual framework which
has been proﬁtably applied to many other problems. Buchbinder and Naor (2009) provide a detailed treatment
of this framework. Note that competitive analysis focuses on worst–case scenarios. In contrast, we assume
probabilistic information about the world and optimize for the average case.
13.3 (Noisy) Interactive Submodular Set Cover
Recent work by Guillory and Bilmes (2010, 2011) considers a class of adaptive optimization problems over
a family of monotone submodular objectives {fh : h ∈H}. In their problem, one must cover a monotone
34

submodular objective fh∗which depends on the (initially unknown) target hypothesis h∗∈H, by adaptively
issuing queries and getting responses. Unlike traditional pool-based active learning, each query may generate
a response from a set of valid responses depending on the target hypothesis. The reward is calculated by
evaluating fh∗on the set of (query, response) pairs observed, and the goal is to obtain some threshold Q of
objective value at minimum total query cost, where queries may have nonuniform costs. In the noisy variant of
the problem (Guillory and Bilmes, 2011), the set of (query, response) pairs observed need not be consistent
with any hypothesis in H, and the goal is to obtain Q of value for all hypotheses that are “close” to being
consistent with the observations. For both variants, Guillory and Bilmes consider the worst-case policy cost,
and provide greedy algorithms optimizing clever hybrid objective functions. They prove an approximation
guarantee of ln(Q|H|) + 1 for integer valued objective functions {fh}h∈H in the noise–free case, and similar
logarithmic approximation guarantees for the noisy case.
While similar in spirit to this work, there are several signiﬁcant differences between the two. Guillory and
Bilmes focus on worst-case policy cost, while we focus mainly on average-case policy cost. The structure
of adaptive submodularity depends on the prior p (φ), whereas there is no such dependence in Interactive
Submodular Set Cover. This dependence in turn allows us to obtain results, such as Theorem 13 for self–
certifying instances, whose approximation guarantee does not depend on the number of realizations in the
way that the guarantees for Interactive Submodular Set Cover depend on |H|. As Guillory and Bilmes prove,
the latter dependence is fundamental under reasonable complexity-theoretic assumptions6. An interesting
open problem within the adaptive submodularity framework that is highlighted by the work on Interactive
Submodular Set Cover is to identify useful instance-speciﬁc properties that are sufﬁcient to improve upon the
worst-case approximation guarantee of Theorem 14.
13.4 Greedy Frameworks for Adaptive Optimization
The paper that is perhaps closest in spirit to this work is the one on Stochastic Depletion problems by Chan and
Farias (2009), who also identify a general class of adaptive optimization problems than can be near-optimally
solved using greedy algorithms (which in their setting give a factor 2 approximation). However, the similarity
is mainly on a conceptual level: The problems and approaches, as well as example applications considered,
are quite different.
13.5 Stochastic Optimization with Recourse
A class of adaptive optimization problems studied extensively in operations research since Dantzig (1955) is
the area of stochastic optimization with recourse. Here, an optimization problem, such as Set Cover, Steiner
Tree or Facility Location, is presented in multiple stages. At each stage, more information is revealed, but costs
of actions increase. A key difference to the problems studied in this paper is that in these problems, information
gets revealed independently of the actions taken by the algorithm. There are general efﬁcient, sampling based
(approximate) reductions of multi-stage optimization to the deterministic setting; see, e.g.,Gupta et al. (2005).
13.6 Bayesian Global Optimization
Adaptive Stochastic Optimization is also related to the problem of Bayesian Global Optimization (for a recent
survey of the area, c.f. Brochu et al. (2009)). In Bayesian Global Optimization, the goal is to adaptively
select inputs in order to maximize an unknown function that is expensive to evaluate (and can possibly only
be evaluated using noisy observations). A common approach that has been successful in many applications
(for a recent application in machine learning, c.f. Lizotte et al. (2007)), is to assume a prior distribution,
such as a Gaussian process, over the unknown objective function. Several criteria for selecting inputs have
been developed, such as the Expected Improvement (Jones et al., 1998) criterion. However, while recently
performance guarantees where obtained in the no-regret setting (Gr¨unew¨alder et al., 2010; Srinivas et al.,
2010), we are not aware of any approximation guarantees for Bayesian Global Optimization.
6. They reduce to Set Cover and use the result of Feige (1998), which requires the assumption NP ⊈DTIME(nO(log log n)), but it
sufﬁces to assume only P ̸= NP using the Set Cover approximation hardness result of Raz and Safra (1997) instead.
35

13.7 Probabilistic Planning
The problem of decision making under partial observability has also been extensively studied in stochastic
optimal control. In particular, Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (Smallwood and Sondik, 1973),
abbreviated as POMDPs, are a general framework that captures many adaptive optimization problems under
partial observability. Unfortunately, solving POMDPs is PSPACE hard (Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis, 1987),
thus typically heuristic algorithms with no approximation guarantees are applied (Pineau et al., 2006; Ross
et al., 2008). For some special instances of POMDPs related to Multi-armed Bandit problems, (near-)optimal
policies can be found. These include the (optimal) Gittins-index policy for the classic Multi-armed Bandit
problem (Gittins and Jones, 1979) and approximate policies for the Multi-armed Bandit problem with metric
switching costs (Guha and Munagala, 2009) and special cases of the Restless Bandit problem (Guha et al.,
2009). The problems considered in this paper can be formalized as POMDPs, albeit with exponentially large
state space (where the world state represents the selected items and state/outcome of each item). Thus our
results can be interpreted as widening the class of partially observable planning problems that can be efﬁciently
approximately solved.
13.8 Previous Work by the Authors & Subsequent Developments
This manuscript is an extended version of a paper that appeared in the Conference on Learning Theory
Golovin and Krause (2010). More recently, Golovin and Krause (2011b) proved performance guarantees
for the greedy policy for the problem of maximizing the expected value of a policy under constraints more
complex than simply selecting at most k items. These include matroid constraints, where a policy can only
select independent sets of items and the greedy policy obtains a 1/2–approximation for adaptive monotone
submodular objectives, and more generally p-independence system constraints, where the greedy policy obtains
a 1/(p + 1)–approximation. Golovin et al. (2010) and, shortly thereafter, Bellala and Scott (2010), used
the adaptive submodularity framework to obtain the ﬁrst algorithms with provable (squared logarithmic)
approximation guarantees for the difﬁcult and fundamental problem of active learning with persistent noise.
Finally, Golovin et al. (2011) used adaptive submodularity in the context of a dynamic conservation planning,
and obtain competitiveness guarantees for an ecological reserve design problem.
14. Conclusions
Planning under partial observability is a central but notoriously difﬁcult problem in artiﬁcial intelligence. In
this paper, we identiﬁed a novel, general class of adaptive optimization problems under uncertainty that are
amenable to efﬁcient, greedy (approximate) solution. In particular, we introduced the concept of adaptive
submodularity, generalizing submodular set functions to adaptive policies. Our generalization is based on a
natural adaptive analog of the diminishing returns property well understood for set functions. In the special
case of deterministic distributions, adaptive submodularity reduces to the classical notion of submodular set
functions. We proved that several guarantees carried by the non-adaptive greedy algorithm for submodular
set functions generalize to a natural adaptive greedy algorithm in the case of adaptive submodular functions,
for constrained maximization and certain natural coverage problems with both minimum cost and minimum
sum objectives. We also showed how the adaptive greedy algorithm can be accelerated using lazy evaluations,
and how one can compute data-dependent bounds on the optimal solution. We illustrated the usefulness of
the concept by giving several examples of adaptive submodular objectives arising in diverse AI applications
including sensor placement, viral marketing, automated diagnosis and pool-based active learning. Proving
adaptive submodularity for these problems allowed us to recover existing results in these applications as special
cases and lead to natural generalizations. Our experiments on real data indicate that adaptive submodularity
can provide practical beneﬁts, such as signiﬁcant speed ups and tighter data-dependent bounds. We believe
that our results provide an interesting step in the direction of exploiting structure to solve complex stochastic
optimization and planning problems under partial observability.
36
