On Minimal Constraint Networks$
Georg Gottlob
Department of Computer Science and Oxford Man Institute
University of Oxford - Oxford OX1 3QD, UK
Abstract
In a minimal binary constraint network, every tuple of a constraint relation can be ex-
tended to a solution. The tractability or intractability of computing a solution to such
a minimal network was a long standing open question. Dechter conjectured this com-
putation problem to be NP-hard. We prove this conjecture. We also prove a conjecture
by Dechter and Pearl stating that for k ≥2 it is NP-hard to decide whether a single
constraint can be decomposed into an equivalent k-ary constraint network. We show
that this holds even in case of bi-valued constraints where k ≥3, which proves another
conjecture of Dechter and Pearl. Finally, we establish the tractability frontier for this
problem with respect to the domain cardinality and the parameter k.
Keywords: Constraint satisfaction, constraint network, CSP, minimal network,
complexity, join decomposition, structure identiﬁcation, relational data, relational
databases, database theory, knowledge compilation, NP-hardness.
1. Introduction
This paper deals with problems related to minimal constraint networks. First, the
complexity of computing a solution to a minimal network is determined. Then, the
problems of recognizing network minimality and network-decomposability are studied.
1.1. Minimal constraint networks
In his seminal 1974 paper [26], Montanari introduced the concept of a minimal
constraint network. Roughly, a minimal network is a constraint network where each
partial instantiation corresponding to a tuple of a constraint relation can be extended
to a solution. Each arbitrary binary network N having variables {X1, . . . , Xv} can
be transformed into an equivalent binary minimal network M(N) by computing the
set sol(N) of all solutions to N and creating for 1 ≤i < j ≤v a constraint cij
$This paper is a signiﬁcantly extended version of a paper with the same title presented at the 17th In-
ternational Conference on Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming [17]. The present paper con-
tains new results in addition to those of [17]. Possible future updates will be made available on CORR
at http://arxiv.org/abs/1103.1604.

Preprint submitted to Artiﬁcial Intelligence
October 24, 2018
arXiv:1103.1604v6  [cs.AI]  25 Jul 2012

whose scope is (Xi, Xj) and whose constraint relation consists of the projection of
sol(N) to (Xi, Xj), and for 1 ≤i ≤v a unary constraint ci whose scope is (Xi)
and whose constraint relation is the projection of sol(N) over (Xi). The minimal
network M(N) is unique, and its solutions are exactly those of the original network,
i.e., sol(N) = sol(M(N)).
An example of a binary constraint network N is given in Figure 1a. This network
has four variables X1, . . . , X4 which, for simplicity, all range over the same numerical
domain {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}. Its solution, sol(N), which is the join of all relations of N, is
shown in Figure 1b. The minimal network M(N) is shown in Figure 1c.
X1
X2
1
1
1
2
1
3
1
5
2
1
2
5
3
4
X2
X3
1
1
1
2
2
2
3
1
4
1
4
3
4
4
X1
X3
1
2
2
1
3
1
3
2
4
1
4
2
4
3
X3
X4
1
2
2
1
3
1
3
2
4
1
4
2
4
3
(a) Binary constraint network N
X1
X2
X3
X4
1
1
2
1
1
2
2
1
2
1
1
2
3
4
1
2
(b) Solution sol(N) of N
X1
X2
1
1
1
2
2
1
3
4
X2
X3
1
1
1
2
2
2
4
1
X1
X3
1
2
2
1
3
1
X1
X4
1
1
2
2
3
2
X2
X4
1
1
1
2
2
1
4
2
X3
X4
1
2
2
1
X1
1
2
3
X2
1
2
4
X3
1
2
X4
1
2
(c) Minimal network M(N)
Figure 1
2

Obviously, M(N), which can be regarded as an optimally pruned version of N, is
hard to compute. But computing M(N) may result in a quite useful knowledge com-
pilation [21, 5]. In fact, with M(N) at hand, we can answer a number of queries in
polynomial time that would otherwise be NP-hard. Typically, these are queries that
involve one or two variables only, for example, the queries ”is there a solution for
which X4 ≤3?” or ”does N have a solution for which X2 < X1?” are afﬁrmatively
answered by a simple lookup in the relevant tables of M(N). For the latter query,
for example, one just has to look into the ﬁrst relation table of M(N), whose tuple
⟨2, 1⟩constitutes a witness. In contrast, in our example, the query “is there a solu-
tion for which X1 < X4?” is immediately recognized to have a negative answer, as
the fourth relation of M(N) has no tuple witnessing this inequality. An example of a
slightly more involved non-Boolean two-variable query that can be polynomially an-
swered using M(N) is: “what is the maximal value of X2 such that X4 is minimum over
all solutions?”. Again, one can just “read off” the answer from the single relation of
M(N) whose variables are those of the query. In our example in Figure 1, it is the
penultimate relation of M(N), that can be easily used to deduce that the answer is 2 .
1.2. Computing solutions to minimal constraint networks
In applications such as computer-supported interactive product conﬁguration, such
queries arise frequently, but it would be useful to be able to exhibit at the same time
a full solution together with the query answer, that is, an assignment of values to all
variables witnessing this answer. However, it was even unclear whether the following
problem is tractable: Given a nonempty minimal network M(N), compute an arbitrary
solution to it. Gaur [11] formulated this as an open problem. He showed that a stronger
version of the problem, where solutions restricted by speciﬁc value assignments to
a pair of variables are sought, is NP-hard, but speculated that ﬁnding arbitrary solu-
tions could be tractable. However, since the introduction of minimal networks in 1974,
no one came up with a polynomial-time algorithm for this task. This led Dechter to
conjecture that this problem is hard [8]. Note that this problem deviates in two ways
from classical decision problems: First, it is a search problem rather than a decision
problem, and second, it is a promise problem, where it is “promised” that the input net-
works, which constitute our problem instances, are indeed minimal — a promise whose
veriﬁcation is itself NP-hard (see Section 4.1). We therefore have to clarify what NP-
hardness means, when referring to such problems. The simplest and probably cleanest
deﬁnition is the following: The problem is NP-hard if any polynomial algorithms solv-
ing it would imply the existence of a polynomial-time algorithm for NP-hard decision
problems, and would thus imply P=NP. In the light of this, Dechter’s conjecture reads
as follows:
Conjecture 1.1 (Dechter[8]). Unless P=NP, computing a single solution to a non-
empty minimal constraint network cannot be done in polynomial time.
While the problem has interested a number of researchers, it has not been solved
until recently. Some progress was made by Bessiere in 2006. In his well-known hand-
book article “Constraint Propagation” [4], he used results of Cros [6] to show that no
backtrack-free algorithm for computing a solution from a minimal network can exist
3

unless the Polynomial Hierarchy collapses to its second level (more precisely, unless
Σp
2 = Πp
2). However, this does not mean that the problem is intractable. A backtrack-
free algorithm according to Bessiere must be able to recognize each partial assignment
that is extensible to a solution. In a sense, such an algorithm, even if it computes only
one solution, must have the potential to compute all solutions just by changing the
choices of the variable-instantiations made at the different steps. In more colloquial
terms, backtrack-free algorithms according to Bessiere must be fair to all solutions.
Bessiere’s result does not preclude the existence of a less general algorithm that com-
putes just one solution, while being unable to recognize all partial assignments, and
thus being unfair to some solutions.
The simple example in Figure 1, by the way, shows that the following na¨ıve back-
track-free strategy is doomed to fail: Pick an arbitrary tuple from the ﬁrst relation of
M(N), expand it by a suitable tuple of the second relation, and so on. In fact, if we
just picked the ﬁrst tuple ⟨1, 1⟩of the ﬁrst relation, we could combine it with the ﬁrst
tuple ⟨1, 1⟩of the second relation and obtain the partial instantiation X1 = X2 =
X3 = 1. However, this partial instantiation is not part of a solution, as it cannot be
expanded to match any tuple of the third relation. While this na¨ıve strategy fails, one
may still imagine the existence of a more sophisticated backtrack-free strategy, that pre-
computes in polynomial time some helpful data structure before embarking on choices.
However, as we show in this paper, such a strategy cannot exist unless NP=P.
In the ﬁrst part of this paper, we prove Dechter’s conjecture by showing that ev-
ery polynomial-time search algorithm A that computes a single solution to a minimal
network can be transformed into a polynomial-time decision algorithm A∗for the clas-
sical satisﬁability problem 3SAT. The proof is carried-out in Section 3. We ﬁrst show
that each SAT instance can be transformed in polynomial time into an equivalent one
that is highly symmetric (Section 3.1). Such symmetric instances, which we call k-
supersymmetric, are then polynomially reduced to the problem of computing a solution
to a minimal binary constraint network (Section 3.2). We further consider the case of
bounded domains, that is, when the input instances are such that the cardinality of the
overall domain of all values that may appear in the constraint relation is bounded by
some ﬁxed constant c. By a simple modiﬁcation of the proof of the general case, it is
easily seen that even in the bounded domain case, the problem of computing a single
solution remains NP-hard (Section 3.3).
Our hardness results for computing relations can be reformulated in terms of data-
base theory. Every constraint network N can be seen as a relational database instance,
where each constraint of N correponds to a single relation instance. The set sol(N)
of all solutions to a binary constraint network (or database instance) N is identical to
the relation obtained by performing the natural join of all relation instances of N. The
minimal network M(N) is then a lossless decomposition of sol(N) according to the
join dependency ∗[S], where S is the schema of M(N). Our main hardness result thus
implies that it is coNP hard to recover an arbitrary single tuple of a relation instance R
(called a universal relation) from its lossles decomposition according to a given single
join dependency, when only this decomposition is given. Lossles decompositions and
universal relations have been studied for many decades, and they were recently related
to hidden variable models in quantum mechanics [1, 2].
4

1.3. Minimality checking and structure identiﬁcation
In Section 4.1, we generalize and slightly strengthen a result by Gaur [11] by show-
ing that it is NP-hard to determine whether a k-ary network is minimal, even in case of
bounded domains.
In Section 4.2, we study the complexity of checking whether a network N con-
sisting of a single constraint relation (typically of arity ≥k) can be represented by an
equivalent k-ary constraint network. Note that this is precisely the case iff there exists
a k-ary minimal network M equivalent to N, i.e, one such that sol(M) = sol(N).
Dechter and Pearl [9] regarded this problem as a relevant complexity problem of struc-
ture identiﬁcation for relational data, i.e., of checking whether an element of a general
class of objects (in this case, data relations) belongs to a structurally simpler subclass
(in this case, k-decomposable relations). This problem is equivalent to the database
problem of testing whether a given instance of a data relation satisﬁes a speciﬁc join
dependency. Dechter and Pearl conjectured that the problem is NP-hard for k ≥2. We
prove this conjecture by showing the problem to be coNP-complete for each k ≥2.
A special case considered in [9] is the one of bi-valued constraints, that is, con-
straints over the Boolean domain. For bi-valued constraints, the above structure iden-
tiﬁcation problem is equivalent to testing whether a Boolean formula represented by
the explicit list of all its models is equivalent to a k-CNF. For k = 2 this problem is
known to be tractable (see [7, 11]). Dechter and Pearl [9] conjectured it to be NP-
hard for every ﬁxed k > 2. In Section 4.3 we prove this conjecture and show that
deciding whether bi-valued relations are k-decomposable is coNP-complete for each
ﬁxed k > 2. Moreover, we show in Section 4.4 that the representability of tri-valued
constraints (and more generally r-valued constraints for r ≥3) as a k-ary network is
coNP-hard for each ﬁxed k ≥2. Put together, our results allow us to trace the precise
tractability frontier for the problem of relational structure identiﬁcation in terms of the
domain cardinality and the parameter k. This is visualized in Fig 3 in Section 4.4.
The paper is concluded in Section 5 by a brief discussion of the practical signif-
icance of our main result, a proposal for the enhancement of minimal networks, and
some hints at possible future research.
2. Preliminaries and basic deﬁnitions
While most of the deﬁnitions in this section are adapted from the standard literature
on constraint satisfaction, in particular [8, 4], we sometimes use a slightly different
notation which is more convenient for our purposes.
Constraints, networks, and solutions. We assume a totally ordered inﬁnite set (X, ≺)
of variables. For Xi, Xj ∈X, Xi ≺Xj means that Xi is smaller than Xj according
to the ”≺” ordering. We assume that all variables of constraint networks are from this
set. A k-ary constraint c is a pair (scope(c), rel(c)). The scope scope(c) of c is a
sequence (Xi1, Xi2 . . . , Xik) of k distinct variables from X, where Xi1 ≺Xi2 ≺
· · · ≺Xik, and where each variable Xij has an associated ﬁnite domain dom(Xij).
The relation rel(c) of c is a subset of the Cartesian product dom(Xi1) × dom(Xi2) ×
5

· · · × dom(Xik). The set {Xi1, . . . , Xik} of all variables occurring in scope(c) is
denoted by var(c). Given that each set of variables is totally ordered by ≺, we shall
identify each set U of variables, whenever convenient, with the list ⃗U of its elements
ordered according to ≺. We thus may write scope(c) = U instead of scope(c) =
⃗U. More generally, since the concepts of lists of distinct elements and ordered sets
coincide, we may use set-theoretic notatation to express facts about such lists. For
example, if s denotes a scope, we may write Xi ∈s to express that Xi is a variable in
this scope. If, moreover, U denotes a list (or even an unordered set) of variables, we
may write s ⊆U to say that each variable of s is also an element of U, and so on.
A Constraint Network N consists of a ﬁnite set var(N) = {X1, . . . , Xv} of vari-
ables with associated domains dom(Xi) for 1 ≤i ≤v, and a set of constraints
cons(N) = {c1, . . . , cm}, where for 1 ≤i ≤m, var(ci) ⊆var(N).
If U ⊆var(N) is a set of variables, then dom(U) = S
X∈U dom(X). The domain
dom(N) of a constraint network N is deﬁned by dom(N) = dom(var(N)). The
schema of N is the set schema(N) = {scope(c)|c ∈cons(N)} of all scopes of the
constraints of N. If S is a schema, then var(S) denotes the set of all variables in
the scopes of S. In particular, if S is the schema of network N, we have var(S) =
var(N). We call N binary (k-ary) if arity(c) ≤2 (arity(c) ≤k) for each constraint
c ∈cons(N).
Let N be a constraint network. An instantiation mapping for a set of variables
W ⊆var(N) is a mapping θ : W −→dom(W), such that for each X ∈var(N),
θ(X) ∈dom(X). We call θ(W) an instantiation of W. An instantiation of a proper
subset W of var(N) is called a partial instantiation while an instantiation of var(N)
is called a full instantiation (also total instantiation). A constraint c of N is satisﬁed
by an instantiation mapping θ : W −→dom(W) if whenever var(c) ⊆W, then
θ(scope(c)) ∈rel(c). An instantiation mapping θ : W −→dom(W) is consistent
if it is satisﬁed by all constraints. By abuse of terminology, if θ is understood and is
consistent, then we may also say that θ(W) is consistent. A solution to a constraint
network N is a consistent full instantiation for N. The set of all solutions of N is
denoted by sol(N). N is solvable iff sol(N) ̸= ∅. Whenever useful, we will identify
the solution set sol(N) with a single constraint whose scope is var(N) and whose
relation consists of all tuples in sol(N). We assume without loss of generality, that for
each set of variables W ⊆var(N) of a constraint network, there exists at most one
constraint c such that var(c) = W. (In fact, if there are two or more constraints with
exactly the same variables in the scope, an equivalent single constraint can always be
obtained by intersecting the constraint relations.)
Complete networks. The complete schema SU
k over a set of variables U denotes the
schema consisting of all nonempty constraint scopes of arity at most k contained in
U. For example, if U = {X1, X2}, then SU
k = {(X1), (X2), (X1, X2)}. If the set
of variables U is understood, we will write Sk instead of SU
k . A k-ary constraint
network N is complete, if its schema is Svar(N)
k
. For each ﬁxed constant k, each k-
ary constraint network N can be transformed by a trivial polynomial reduction into an
equivalent complete k-ary network N + with sol(N) = sol(N +). In fact, if ℓ≤k,
then for each (ordered) set of variables W = {Xi1, . . . , Xiℓ} that is in no scope of
6

N, we may just add the trivial constraint ⊤W with scope(⊤W ) = (Xi1, . . . , Xiℓ) and
rel(⊤W ) = dom(Xi1) × dom(Xi2) × · · · × dom(Xiℓ). For this reason, we may,
whenever useful, restrict our attention to complete networks. Some authors, such as
Montanari [26] who studies binary networks, assume by deﬁnition that all networks
are complete, others, such as Dechter [8] make this assumption implicitly.
Intersections of networks, containment, and projections. Let N1 and N2 be two con-
straint networks deﬁned over the same schema S (that is, the same set S of con-
straint scopes). The intersection M = N1 ∩N2 of N1 and N2 is the network having
var(M) = var(N1) = var(N2), and having a constraint cs, for each s ∈S, such that
scope(cs) = s and rel(cs) = rel(cs
1) ∩rel(cs
2), where c1 and c2 are the constraints
having scope s of N1 and N2, respectively. The intersection of arbitrary families of
constraint networks deﬁned over the same schema is deﬁned in a similar way. For two
networks N1 and N2 over the same schema S, we say that c1 is contained in c2, and
write N1 ⊆N2, if for each s ∈S, and for c1 ∈cons(N1) and c2 ∈cons(N2) with
scope(c1) = scope(c2) = s, rel(c1) ⊆rel(c2). If c is a constraint over a set of vari-
ables W = {X1, . . . , Xv} and V ⊆W, then the projection ΠV (c) is the constraint
whose scope is V , and whose relation is the projection over V of rel(c). Let c be a
constraint and S a schema consisting of one or more scopes contained in scope(c),
then ΠS(c) = {Πs(c)|s ∈S}.
Minimal networks. Let c be a constraint with var(c) = U. The projection ΠSU
k (c)
will henceforth just denote by ΠSk(c). Thus ΠSk(c) is the constraint network obtained
by projecting c over all scopes in the schema SU
k (simply denoted by Sk), i.e., over all
nonempty ordered lists of at most k variables from var(c). In particular, the constraints
of ΠS2(c) are precisely all ΠW (c) such that W ⊆var(c) is a unary or binary scope.
It was ﬁrst observed in [26] that for each binary constraint network N, there is a
unique binary minimal network M(N) that consists of the intersection of all binary
networks N ′ over schema S2 for which sol(N ′) = sol(N). Minimality here is with
respect to the above deﬁned “⊆”-relation among binary networks. More generally, for
each k-ary network N there is a unique k-ary minimal network Mk(N) that is the
intersection of all k-ary networks N ′ over schema Sk for which sol(N ′) = sol(N).
(For the special case k = 2 we have M2(N) = M(N).) The following is well-known
[26, 27, 8, 4, 19] and easy to see:
• Mk(N) = ΠSk(sol(N)).
• Mk(N) ⊆N ′ for all k-ary networks N ′ with sol(N ′) = sol(N).
• A k-ary network N is satisﬁable (i.e., has at least one solution) iff Mk(N) is
non-empty.
• A k-ary network N is minimal iff ΠSk(sol(N)) = N.
• A k-ary network N is minimal iff Mk(N) = N.
• A network N over schema Sk is minimal iff there exists a universal relation ρ
for N, that is, a single constraint ρ such that N = ΠSk(ρ). In this case N is said
to be join consistent (see [19]).
7

It is obvious that for k ≥2, Mk(N) is hard to compute. In fact, just deciding
whether for a network N, Mk(N) is the empty network is coNP-complete, because
this decision problem is equivalent to deciding whether N has no solution. (Recall
that deciding whether a network N has a solution is NP-complete [23].) In this paper,
however, we are not primarily interested in computing Mk(N), but in computing a
single solution, in case Mk(N) has already been computed and is known.
Graph theoretic characterization of minimal networks. An n-partite graph is a graph
whose vertices can be partitioned into n disjoint sets so that no two vertices from the
same set are adjacent. It is well-known (see, e.g., [31]) that each binary constraint net-
work N on n variables can be represented as an n-partite graph GN. The vertices of
GN are possible instantiations of the variables by their corresponding domain values.
Thus, for each variable Xi and possible domain value a ∈dom(Xi), there is a vertex
Xa
i . Two vertices Xa
i and Xb
j are connected by an edge in GN iff the relation of the
constraint cN
ij with scope (Xi, Yj) contains the tuple (a, b).1 Gaur [11] gave the follow-
ing nice characterization of minimal networks: A solvable2 complete binary constraint
network N on n variables is minimal iff each edge of N is part of a clique of size n of
GN. Note that by deﬁnition of GN as an n-partite graph, there cannot be any clique
in GN with more than n vertices, and thus the cliques of n vertices are precisely the
maximum cliques of GN.
Satisﬁability problems.
An instance C of the Satisﬁability (SAT) problem is a con-
junction of clauses (often just written as a set of clauses), each of which consists of
a disjunction (often written as set) of literals, i.e., of positive or negated propositional
variables. Propositional variables are also called (propositional) atoms. If α is a set of
clauses or a single clause, then we denote by propvar(α) the set of all propositional
variables occurring in α.
A 3SAT instance is a SAT instance each clause of which is a disjunction of at most
three literals. 3SAT is the problem of deciding whether a 3SAT instance is satisﬁable.
3. NP-hardness of computing minimal network solutions
To show that computing a single solution to a minimal network is NP-hard, we will
do exactly the contrary of what people — or automatic constraint solvers — usually do
whilst solving a constraint network or a SAT instance. While everybody aims at break-
ing symmetries, we will actually introduce additional symmetry into a 3SAT instance
and its corresponding constraint network representation. This will be achieved by the
Symmetry Lemma to be proved in the next section.
1We disregard unary relations of N here; in fact, each unary relation of a constraint network can be
eliminated by appropriately restricting the domain of its scope variable.
2We here refer to solvability according to our deﬁnition; Gaur uses a different deﬁnition of this term.
8

3.1. The Symmetry Lemma
The following lemma shows that, for each ﬁxed k ≥1, one can transform an
arbitrary 3SAT instance C in polynomial time into a satisﬁability-equivalent highly
symmetric SAT instance C∗such that, whenever C (and thus C∗) is satisﬁable, each
truth value assignment to any k variables of C∗can be extended to a truth value as-
signment satisfying C∗. Before stating the lemma, let us formally deﬁne this notion of
symmetry, which we refer to as supersymmetry.
Deﬁnition 3.1. For k ≥1, a SAT instance C is k-supersymmetric if C is either un-
satisﬁable or if for each set of k propositional variables {p1, . . . , pk} ⊆propvar(C)
and for each arbitrary truth value assignment η to {p1, . . . , pk}, there exists a satisfying
truth value assignment τ for C that extends η. A SAT instance that is 2-supersymmetric
is also called supersymmetric.
Assume k < k′. By the above deﬁnition, if a SAT instance C is k′-supersymmetric,
then C is also k-supersymmetric. However, a k-supersymmetric SAT instance C is not
necessarily also k′-supersymmetric.
Lemma 3.1 (Symmetry Lemma). For each ﬁxed integer k ≥1, there is a polynomial-
time transformation T that transforms each 3SAT instance C into a k-supersymmetric
SAT instance C∗such that C is satisﬁable iff C∗is satisﬁable.
We illustrate the proof of Lemma 3.1 by an example. A full proof is given in Ap-
pendix A
Proof. (Illustration by Example) Consider the 3SAT instance C = C1∧C2∧C3, where
C1
=
p
∨
¬q
∨
r
C2
=
¬p
∨
¬q
C3
=
q
Clearly, the above 3SAT instance C, while satisﬁable, is not even 1-supersymmetric,
and therefore, a fortiori, not k-supersymmetric for any k ≥1. To see this, observe that
the partial truth-value assignment assigning false to q always falsiﬁes clause C3, and
can thus not be extended to a satisfying truth value assignment for C. In the sequel,
we illustrate how C can be transformed by a polynomial-time transformation T into
a satisﬁable supersymmetric SAT instance C∗= T(C). To this aim we introduce to
each propositional variable v of C a set New(v) of ﬁve new propositional variables. In
particular, we have:
New(p)
=
{p1, p2, p3, p4, p5},
New(q)
=
{q1, q2, q3, q4, q5}, and
New(r)
=
{r1, r2, r3, r4, r5}.
We now create C∗from C by taking the conjunction of all clauses obtained by
replacing in each clause of C each positive literal v in all possible ways by the disjunc-
tion vi ∨vj ∨vk of three elements vi, vj, vk ∈New(v), and by replacing each negative
literal ¬v in all possible ways by the disjunction ¬vi ∨¬vj ∨¬vk, where vi, vj, vk are
9

elements of New(v). Each clause is thus replaced by a multitude of other clauses that
are all taken in conjunction. In particular, in our example, clause C1 will actually be
replaced by the conjunction of the following 1000 clauses C1
1 . . . C1000
1
:
C1
1 :
p1 ∨p2 ∨p3
∨
¬q1 ∨¬q2 ∨¬q3
∨
r1 ∨r2 ∨r3;
C2
1 :
p1 ∨p2 ∨p3
∨
¬q1 ∨¬q2 ∨¬q3
∨
r1 ∨r2 ∨r4;
C3
1 :
p1 ∨p2 ∨p3
∨
¬q1 ∨¬q2 ∨¬q3
∨
r1 ∨r2 ∨r5;
. . .
. . . . . .
.
. . . . . .
.
. . . . . .
C10
1 :
p1 ∨p2 ∨p3
∨
¬q1 ∨¬q2 ∨¬q3
∨
r3 ∨r4 ∨r5;
C11
1 :
p1 ∨p2 ∨p3
∨
¬q1 ∨¬q2 ∨¬q4
∨
r1 ∨r2 ∨r3;
. . .
. . . . . .
.
. . . . . .
.
. . . . . .
C1000
1
:
p3 ∨p4 ∨p5
∨
¬q3 ∨¬q4 ∨¬q5
∨
r3 ∨r4 ∨r5.
Similarly, clause C2 = ¬p ∨¬q is replaced by the following 100 clauses C1
2 . . . C100
2
:
C1
2 :
¬p1 ∨¬p2 ∨¬p3
∨
¬q1 ∨¬q2 ∨¬q3 :
C1
2 :
¬p1 ∨¬p2 ∨¬p3
∨
¬q1 ∨¬q2 ∨¬q4;
. . .
. . . . . .
.
. . . . . .
C100
2
:
¬p3 ∨¬p4 ∨¬p5
∨
¬q3 ∨¬q4 ∨¬q5.
Finally, clause C3 = p is replaced by the following 10 clauses C1
3, . . . , C10
3 :
C1
3 :
q1 ∨q2 ∨q3;
C2
3 :
q1 ∨q2 ∨q4;
. . .
. . . . . .
C10
3 :
q3 ∨q4 ∨q5.
The SAT instance C∗= T(C) then consists of the conjunction of all these clauses:
C∗= C1
1 ∧. . . ∧C1000
1
∧C1
2 ∧. . . ∧C100
2
∧C1
3 ∧. . . ∧C10
3 .
We claim — and formally prove in Appendix A — that the above transformation
from a 3SAT instance C to a SAT instance C∗satisﬁes the following two key facts:
Fact 1 C∗is satisﬁable iff C is satisﬁable (in our example, C∗is thus satisﬁable). In
fact, each satisﬁable truth value assignment τ to the propositional variables of C
can be transformed to a satisfying truth value assignment τ ∗to C∗as follows:
If τ(v) = true, then let τ ∗assign true to at least three propositional variables
in New(v), and false to all others, and if τ(v) = false, then let τ ∗assign false
to at least three propositional variables in New(v), and true to all others. In our
example, for instance, consider the truth value assignment τ satisfying C, where
τ(p) = false and τ(q) = τ(r) = true. This truth value assignment satisﬁes r
10

and therefore C1. The assignment τ ∗to C∗thus assigns true to at least three
atoms from New(r) = {r1, r2, r3, r4, r5}, assume, for example to {r1, r4, r5}.
But each 3-element subset of New(r) has a non-empty intersection with each
other non-empty three element subset of New(r), and thus with the set of atoms
of each and every clause Ci
1 ∈{C1
1, . . . , C1000
1
}. Therefore, each such clause
Ci
1 is satisﬁed. For example, C1
1 has a r1 in common with the set {r1, r4, r5},
and so must be satisﬁed by τ ∗for τ ∗(r1) = true. A similar argument holds for
negative literals. Applying the same type of reasoning to all clauses Ci of C,
given that each such Ci has at least one literal satisﬁed by τ, all clauses Cj
i of
C∗are satisﬁed by τ ∗. In summary, τ ∗satisﬁes C∗. Vice versa, we show in the
full proof that if C∗is satisﬁable, then so must be C.
Fact 2 C∗is supersymmetric. Intuitively, this is due to the great choice of truth value
assignments to the propositional variables in New(v), when constructing a sat-
isfying assignment τ ∗for C∗, as above, from an assignment τ for C. Imag-
ine, for illustration, we’d like to construct a truth value assignment τ ∗satisfy-
ing our example-instance C∗, such that τ ∗(p1) = true and τ ∗(q3) = false.
Note that no truth value assignment to instance C can actually satisfy p or fal-
sify q. Notwithstanding, we are able to ﬁnd an appropriate τ ∗with the desired
properties. We start with an arbitrary satisfying truth value assignment τ to C,
for example, the one where τ(p) = false and τ(q) = τ(r) = true. To con-
struct τ ∗, let us ﬁrst deﬁne τ ∗on the elements of New(p) = {p1, . . . , p5}.
According to the construction rules for τ ∗in the previous paragraph, given
that τ(p) = false, τ ∗must assign false to at least three elements of New(p),
but not necessarily to all elements of New(p).
This leaves us the freedom
of assigning true to p1. So, we can, for example, assign false to p2, p3, p4,
and p5, and true to p1. Similarly, given that τ(q) = true, τ ∗must assign
true to at least three elements of New(q), which can be done while fulﬁll-
ing at the same time our requirement that τ ∗(q3) = false. For example, let
τ ∗(q1) = τ ∗(q2) = τ ∗(q5) = true and τ ∗(q3) = τ ∗(q4) = false. Finally, the
only requirement regarding the truth values assigned by τ ∗to the elements of
New(r) is that at least three of these propositional variables be assigned true.
Thus, for example, let τ ∗(r1) = τ ∗(r2) = . . . = τ ∗(r5) = true. In summary,
it is easy to see (and actually follows from Fact 1) that the truth value assign-
ment τ ∗constructed this way satisﬁes C∗. Moreover, τ ∗extends the initially
given partial truth value assignment τ ∗(p1) = true and τ ∗(q3) = false. More
generally, for every pair v, w of propositional variables of C∗, and for every
truth value assignment η to {v, w}, one can construct a truth value assignment
τ ∗that extends η and satisﬁes C∗This shows that C∗is 2-supersymmetric, i.e.,
supersymmetric.
As easily seen, the transformation from an arbitrary 3SAT instance C to the corre-
sponding C∗is polynomial-time computable. Together with Facts 1 and 2, this infor-
mally proves the Symmetry Lemma for k = 2. For k > 2, the proof is analogous.
REMARK. The concept of supersymmetry is somewhat related to the notions of quad-
rangle and subquadrangle deﬁned in [30] and further discussed in [20]. A quadrangle
11

is a single constraint c that is satisﬁed for all value-assignments that assign any arbi-
trary value from dom(X) to each variable X in scope(c). Thus, the constraint relation
rel(c) of a quadrangle c simply consists of a Cartesian product of domains. An n-ary
constraint c is a subquadrangle if each projection of c to n −1 or fewer variables from
scope(c) is a quadrangle. Generalizing this notion, we deﬁne a k-subquadrangle to be
a constraint, all of whose projections to k variables are quadrangles. In this context,
Lemma 3.1 may be reformulated as follows: For each k ≥1, every satisﬁable 3SAT
instance C can be transformed to a satisﬁable SAT instance C∗whose solution relation
sol(C∗) is a k-subquadrangle.
3.2. Intractability of computing solutions
The Symmetry Lemma is used for proving our main intractability result.
Theorem 3.1. For each ﬁxed constant k ≥2, unless NP=P, computing a single solu-
tion from a minimal k-ary constraint network N cannot be done in polynomial time.
The problem remains intractable even if the cardinality of each variable-domain is
bounded by a ﬁxed constant.
Proof. We ﬁrst prove the theorem for k = 2. Assume A is an algorithm that computes
in time p(n), where p is some polynomial, a solution A(N) to each non-empty minimal
binary constraint network N of size n. We will construct a polynomial-time 3SAT-
solver A∗from A. The theorem then follows.
Let us ﬁrst deﬁne a simple transformation S from SAT instances to equivalent bi-
nary constraint networks. S transforms conjunctions K = K1 ∧· · · ∧Kr of at least
two clauses into binary constraint networks S(K) = NK as follows. The set of vari-
ables var(NK) is deﬁned by var(NK) = {K1, . . . , Kr}. For each variable Ki of NK,
the domain dom(Ki) consists exactly of all literals appearing in Ki. For each distinct
pair of clauses (Ki, Kj), i < j, there is a constraint cij having scope(cij) = (Ki, Kj)
and rel(cij) = (dom(Ki) × dom(Kj)) −{(p, ¯p), (¯p, p) | p ∈propvar(K)}. More-
over, for each variable Ki there is a unary constraint ci whise scope contains the single
variable Ki, such that rel(ci) = dom(Ki). It is easy to see that K is satisﬁable iff NK
is solvable. Basically, NK is solvable, iff we can pick one literal per clause such that
the set of all picked literals contains no atom together with its negation. But this is just
equivalent to the satisﬁability of K. The transformation S is clearly polynomial-time
computable.
Now consider constraint networks NC∗= S(C∗), where C∗is obtained via trans-
formation T as in Lemma 3.1 from some 3SAT instance C, i.e., C∗= T(C). In a
precise sense, NC∗inherits the high symmetry present in C∗. In fact, if C∗is satisﬁ-
able, then, by Lemma 3.1, for every pair ℓ1, ℓ2 of non-contradictory literals, there is a
satisfying assignment that makes both literals true. Thus, if C∗(and thus C) is satis-
ﬁable, for every constraint cij, we may pick each pair (ℓ1, ℓ2) in rel(cij) as part of a
solution, and thus no such pair is useless. Moreover, if C∗is satisﬁable, then, clearly,
each value in the relations of each unary constraint ci is part of a solution. It follows
that if C∗— and thus C — is satisﬁable, then M(NC∗) = NC∗, which means that
NC∗is minimal. We thus have:
12

(∗) If C is satisﬁable then NC∗is non-empty and minimal.
We are now ready for specifying our 3SAT-solver A∗that works in polynomial
time, and hence witnesses NP=P. Algorithm A∗is also illustrated by the ﬂowchart in
Figure 2. The input of A∗is a 3SAT input instance C. We here assume without loss of
generality that C has at least two clauses. A∗works as follows:
1. Apply transformation T to C and get C∗:= T(C).
Note: C∗is supersymmetric and C∗is satisﬁable iff C is.
2. Apply transformation S to C∗and get NC∗:= S(C∗).
Note: NC∗solvable ⇔C∗satisﬁable ⇔C satisﬁable.
3. Run A on input NC∗for p(|NC∗|) steps; denote by w the output at this point.
Note: If C (and thus C∗) is satisﬁable, then NC∗is a solvable minimal network,
and thus w is a solution to NC∗; otherwise NC∗is unsolvable, and w is the
empty string or any string other than a solution to NC∗.
4. Check if w is a solution to NC∗.
5. If w is not a solution to NC∗then output “C unsatisﬁable” and stop.
Note: In fact, if w is not a solution to NC∗then NC∗is either empty or non-
minimal. By the contrapositive of Fact (∗), C must then be unsatisﬁable.
6. If w is a solution to NC∗then output “C satisﬁable” and stop.
Note: If w is a solution, then NC∗is solvable, and thus C∗and C are satisﬁable.
Each step of A∗requires polynomial time only. The polynomial runtime of step 3
depends parametrically on the ﬁxed polynomial p. A∗is thus a polynomial-time 3SAT
solver. The theorem for k = 2 follows.
NC*
Run A on input NC*  
for  p(| NC*|) steps
w
w 
solution to 
NC*  ?
SAT  instance 
C 
Transformation T
C*
Transformation S
C  unsatisfiable  
START
C satisfiable  
yes
no
(supersymmetric)
Figure 2: Flowchart of the 3SAT-solver A∗
13

Note that C∗, as constructed in the proof of Theorem 3.1, is a 9SAT instance, hence
the cardinality of the domain of each variable of NC∗is bounded by 9.
For k > 2, the proof is analogous, the main change being that the transformation
S now creates an ℓ-ary constraint cL for each (ordered) set L of ℓ≤k clauses from
C. The resulting constraint network NC∗= S(C∗), where C∗is as constructed in
Lemma 3.1 then does the job. □
3.3. The case of bounded domains
Theorem 3.1 states that the problem of computing a solution from a non-empty
minimal binary network is intractable even in case the cardinalities of the domains of
all variables are bounded by a constant. However, if we take the total domain dom(N),
which is the set of all literals of C∗, its cardinality is unbounded. This notwithstanding,
the following simple corolloary to Theorem 3.1 shows that even in case |dom(N)| is
bounded, computing a single solution from a minimal network N is hard.
Corollary 3.1. For each ﬁxed k ≥2, unless NP=P, computing a single solution from a
minimal k-ary constraint network N cannot be done in polynomial time, even in case
|dom(N)| is bounded by a constant.
Proof.
We prove the result for k = 2; for higher values of k, the proof is totally
analogous. The key fact we exploit here is that each variable Ka of NC∗in the proof of
Theorem 3.1 has a domain of exactly nine elements, corresponding to the nine literals
occurring in clause Ka of C∗. We “standardize” these domains by simply renaming
the nine literals for each variable by the numbers 1 to 9. We thus get an equivalent
minimal constraint network with a total domain of cardinality 9. □
4. Minimal Network Recognition and Structure Identiﬁcation
In this section we ﬁrst deal with the complexity of recognizing whether a k-ary
network M is the minimal network of a k-ary network N (Section 4.1). We then study
the problem of deciding whether a k-ary network M is the minimal network of a single
constraint (Section 4.2).
4.1. Minimal network recognition
An algorithmic problem of obvious relevance is recognizing whether a given net-
work is minimal. Using the graph-theoretic characterization of minimal networks de-
scribed in Section 2, Gaur [11] has shown the following for binary networks:
Proposition 4.1 (Gaur [11]). Deciding whether a complete binary network N is mini-
mal is NP-complete under Turing reductions.
We generalize Gaur’s result to the k-ary case and slightly strengthen it by showing
NP-completeness under the standard notion of polynomial-time many-one reductions:
14

Theorem 4.1.
For each k ≥2, deciding whether a complete k-ary network N is
minimal is NP-complete, even in case of bounded domain sizes.
Proof. Membership in NP is easily seen: We just need to guess a candidate solution
st from sol(N) for each of the polynomially many tuples t of each constraint c of N,
and check in polynomial time that st is effectively a solution and that the projection
of st over scope(c) yields t. For proving hardness, revisit the proof of Theorem 3.1.
For each k ≥2, from a 3SAT instance C, we there construct in polynomial time a
highly symmetric k-ary network with bounded domain sizes NC∗, such that NC∗is
minimal (i.e., Mk(NC∗) = NC∗iff C is satisﬁable). This is clearly a standard many-
one reduction from 3SAT to network minimality.
□
A result in database theory similar to Theorem 4.1 was shown in [19], where it was
proven that determining whether a set of database relations is join consistent (i.e., ad-
mits a universal relation) is NP-complete. This was actually proven for sets of binary
relations, however not over schema Sk. Here we showed that this also holds for com-
plete k-ary networks, i.e., for sets of relations ove the speciﬁc schemas Sk, for each
k ≥2.
4.2. Structure identiﬁcation and k-representability
This section as well as Sections 4.3 and 4.4 are dedicated to the problem of rep-
resenting single constraints (or single-constraint networks) through equivalent k-ary
minimal networks. By a slight abuse of terminology, when there is no danger of confu-
sion, we will often identify a single-constraint network {ρ} with its unique constraint
ρ, and for tuples t of the relation rel(ρ) of the constraint ρ, we may write t ∈ρ instead
of t ∈rel(ρ).
Deﬁnition 4.1. A complete k-ary network M is a minimal k-ary network of ρ iff
1. sol(M) = ρ, and
2. every tuple occurring in some constraint r of M is the projection of some tuple
t of ρ over scope(r).
We say that a constraint relation ρ is k-representable if there exists a (not neces-
sarily complete) k-ary constraint network M such that sol(M) = ρ. The following
proposition seems to be well-known and follows very easily from Deﬁnition 4.1 any-
way.
Proposition 4.2. Let ρ be a constraint. The following three statements are equivalent:
1. ρ has a minimal k-ary network;
2. sol(ΠSk(ρ)) = ρ;
3. ρ is k-representable.
Note that the equivalence of ρ being k-representable and of ρ admitting a minimal
k-ary network emphasizes the importance and usefulness of minimal networks. In a
sense this equivalence means that the minimal k-ary network of ρ, if it exists, already
represents all k-ary networks that are equivalent to ρ.
15

The complexity of deciding whether a minimal k-ary network for a relation ρ ex-
ists has been stated as an open problem by Dechter and Pearl in [9]. More precisely,
Dechter and Pearl consider the equivalent problem of deciding whether sol(ΠSk(ρ)) =
ρ holds, and refer to this problem as a problem of structure identiﬁcation in relational
data [9]. The idea is to identify the class of relations ρ that have the structural property
of being equivalent to the k-ary network ΠSk(ρ), and thus, of being k-representable.
Dechter and Pearl formulated the following conjecture:
Conjecture 4.1 (Dechter and Pearl [9]). For each ﬁxed positive integer k ≥2, decid-
ing whether sol(ΠSk(ρ)) = ρ is NP-hard3.
As already observed by Dechter and Pearl in [9], there is a close relationship be-
tween the k-representability of constraint relations and a relevant database problem.
Let us brieﬂy digress on this. It is common knowledge that a single constraint ρ can
be identiﬁed with a data relation in the context of relational databases (cf. [8]). The
decomposition of relations plays an important role in the database area, in particular
in the context of normalization [24]. It consists of decomposing a relation ρ without
loss of information into smaller relations whose natural join yields precisely ρ.
If
ρ is a concrete data relation (i.e., a relational instance), and S is a family of subsets
(subschemas) of the schema of ρ, then the decomposition of ρ over S consists of the
projection ΠS = {Πs(ρ) | s ∈S} of ρ over all schemes in S. This decomposition is
lossless iff the natural join of all Πs(ρ) yields precisely ρ, or, equivalently, iff ρ satisﬁes
the join dependency ∗[S]. We can thus reformulate the concept of k-decomposability
in terms of database theory as follows: A relation ρ is k-decomposable iff it satisﬁes
the join dependency ∗[Sk], i.e., iff the decomposition of ρ into schema Sk is lossless.
The following complexity result was shown as early as 1981 in [25]4
Proposition 4.3 (Maier, Sagiv, and Yannakakis [25]). Given a relation ρ and a family
S of subsets of the schema of ρ, it is coNP-complete to determine whether ρ satisﬁes
the join dependency ∗[S], or equivalently, whether the decomposition of ρ into schema
S is lossless.
Proposition 4.3 is weaker than Conjecture 4.1 and does not by itself imply it, nor
so does its proof given in [25]. In fact, Conjecture 4.1 speaks about the very speciﬁc
sets Sk for k ≥2, which are neither mentioned in Proposition 4.3 nor used in its proof.
Actually, the NP-hardness proof in [25] transforms 3SAT into the problem of checking
a join dependency ∗[S] over schema S = (S1, . . . , Sm+1), where one of the relation
schemas, namely Sm+1 is of unbounded arity (depending on the input 3SAT instance),
while the others are of arity 4. To prove Conjecture 4.1, that refers to the speciﬁc
3Actually, the conjecture stated in [9] is somewhat weaker: Given a relation ρ and an integer k, deciding
whether sol(ΠSk(ρ)) = ρ is NP-hard. Thus k is not ﬁxed and is part of the input instance. However, from
the context and use of this conjecture in [9] it is clear that Dechter and Pearl actually intend NP-hardness for
each ﬁxed k ≥2.
4 As mentioned by Dechter and Pearl [9], Jeff Ullman has proved this result, too. In fact, Ullman, on
a request by Judea Pearl, while not aware of the speciﬁc result in [25], has produced a totally independent
proof in 1991, and sent it as a private communication to Pearl. The result is also implicit in Moshe Vardi’s
1981 PhD thesis.
16

schema Sk in which all relations have arity at most k, we thus needed to develop a new
and independent hardness argument.
Theorem 4.2. For each ﬁxed integer k ≥2, deciding for a single constraint ρ whether
sol(ΠSk(ρ)) = ρ, that is, whether ρ is k-decomposable, is coNP-complete.
Proof. We show that deciding whether sol(ΠSk(ρ)) ̸= ρ is NP-complete.
Membership. Membership in NP already follows from Proposition 4.3, but we give
a short proof of it here for sake of self-containment. Clearly, ρ ⊆sol(ΠSk(ρ)). Thus
sol(ΠSk(ρ)) ̸= ρ iff the containment is proper, which means that there exists a tuple
t0 in sol(ΠSk(ρ)) not contained in ρ. One can guess such a tuple t0 in polynomial
time and check in polynomial time that for each ℓ≤k, each ℓ-tuple of variables
Xi1, . . . , Xiℓof var(ρ), the projection of t0 to (Xi1, . . . , Xiℓ) is indeed a tuple of the
corresponding constraint of Sk. Thus determining whether sol(ΠSk(ρ)) ̸= ρ is in NP.
Hardness. We ﬁrst show hardness for the binary case, that is, the case where k = 2.
We use the NP-hard problem 3COL of deciding whether a graph G = (V, E) with set
of vertices V = {v1, . . . , vn} and edge set E is 3-colorable. Let G be given as input
instance. We assume without loss of generality that G has at least three vertices. Let
r, g, b be three data values standing for the three colors red, green, and blue, respec-
tively. Let N3COL be the constraint network deﬁned as follows. The set of variables
var(N3COL) = {X1, . . . , Xn}. The schema S+
2 of N3COL consists of all exactly binary
scopes (Xi, Xj) where Xi ≺Xj, and dom(Xi) = {r, g, b} for 1 ≤i ≤n. Moreover,
for all 1 ≤i < j ≤n, the constraint cij with schema (Xi, Xj) has the following
constraint relation rel(cij) = rij: if (i, j) ∈E, then rij is the set of pairs repre-
senting all legal vertex colorings, i.e., rij = {(r, g), (g, r), (r, b), (b, r), (g, b), (b, g)};
otherwise rij = {r, g, b}2. N3COL is thus a straightforward encoding of 3COL over
schema S+
2 , and obviously G is 3-colorable iff sol(N3COL) ̸= ∅. Thus, deciding whether
sol(N3COL) ̸= ∅is NP-hard.
We construct from N3COL a single constraint ρ with schema {X1, . . . , Xn} as fol-
lows. The domain dom(ρ) contains the color constants r, g, and b, as well as special
”tuple identiﬁers” to be detailed below. For each constraint cij of N3COL, and for each
tuple (a, b) ∈rij, ρ contains a tuple t whose Xi and Xj values are a and b, respec-
tively, and whose Xℓvalue, for all 1 ≤ℓ≤n, ℓ̸= i, ℓ̸= j, is a constant dt
ij, different
from all values used in other tuples, whose purpose is to act as a tuple-identiﬁer. This
concludes the description of the transformation from a 3COL instance G = (V, E) to
a constraint network N3COL and further to a constraint ρ. Clearly, this transformation is
feasible in polynomial time. We claim the following:
CLAIM: sol(ΠS2(ρ)) ̸= ρ iff sol(N3COL) ̸= ∅(and thus iff G is 3-colorable).
This claim clearly implies the NP-hardness of deciding sol(ΠSk(ρ)) ̸= ρ. Let us
prove that the claim holds.
We start with the if direction. Assume sol(N3COL) ̸= ∅. Then G = (V, E) is 3-
colorable and hence there exists a function f : V −→{r, g, b} such that for each edge
⟨vi, vj⟩∈E, f(vi) ̸= f(vj). Let t be the tuple deﬁned by: ∀1 ≤i ≤n, t[Xi] = f(vi).
Then, by deﬁnition of t and ρ, for each 1 ≤i < j ≤n, t[Xi, Xj] ∈ΠXi,Xj(ρ) and
fort each 1 ≤i ≤n, t[Xi] ∈ΠXi(ρ). Therefore, t ∈sol(ΠS2(ρ)). However, t ̸∈ρ,
because each tuple of ρ, unlike t, has some tuple identiﬁers as components. It thus
follows that sol(ΠS2(ρ)) ̸= ρ.
17

Let us now show the only if direction of the claim. Assume sol(ΠS2(ρ)) ̸= ρ.
Given that, as already noted, ρ ⊆sol(ΠS2(ρ)), there must exist a tuple t0 ∈sol(ΠS2(ρ))
such that t0 ̸∈ρ. We show that t0 can contain values from {r, g, b} only, and must,
moreover, be a solution to N3COL. Assume a tuple identiﬁer d = dt
ij occurs as a compo-
nent of t0. By construction of ρ, d occurs in precisely one single tuple t of ρ. It follows
that each relation of ΠS2(ρ) has at most one tuple containing d, and therefore the join
of all relations of ΠS2(ρ) contains a single tuple only in which d occurs as data value,
namely t itself.
Therefore, t0 = t, and hence t0 ∈ρ, which contradicts our assump-
tion that t0 ̸∈ρ. We have thus shown that t0 cannot contain any tuple identiﬁer at all,
and can be made of “color elements” from {r, g, b} only. However, by deﬁnition of ρ,
each tuple tij ∈{r, g, b}2 occurring in a relation with schema (Xi, Xj) of ΠS2(ρ) also
occurs in the corresponding relation of N3COL, and vice versa. Thus sol(ΠS2(ρ)) ̸= ρ
iff sol(N3COL) ̸= ∅iff G is 3-colorable, which proves our claim.
For each ﬁxed k > 2 we can apply exactly the same line of reasoning. We deﬁne
N k
kCOL as the complete network on variables {X1, . . . , Xn} of all k-ary correct “color-
ing” constraints, where the relation with schema Xi1, . . . , Xik expresses the correct
colorings of vertices vi1, . . . , vik of graph G. We then deﬁne ρ in a similar way as
for k = 2: each k-tuple of a relation of N k
kCOL is extended by use of (possibly multiple
occurrences of) a tuple identiﬁer to an n-tuple of ρ. Given that k is ﬁxed, ρ can be
constructed in polynomial time, and so ΠSk(ρ). It is readily seen that each tuple of
sol(ΠSk(ρ)) that contains a tuple identiﬁer is already present in ρ because for each
tuple-identiﬁer value d, each relation of ΠSk(ρ) contains at most one tuple involving
d. Hence, any tuple in sol(ΠSk(ρ)) −ρ involves values from {r, g, b} only, and is a
solution to N k
kCOL and thus a valid 3-coloring of G. □
4.3. The case of bi-valued relations
Let us now turn our attention to bi-valued relations ρ, that is, relations ρ over a
binary domain. As explained in Section 3.2 of [9], such bi-valued relations are of
special interest, as that they correspond to Boolaen formulas. For example, a 3CNF
can be seen as a bi-valued constraint network of ternary relations, and a single bi-
valued relation ρ corresponds to a DNF. The problem of structure identiﬁcation in the
bi-valued case thus corresponds to relevant identiﬁcation and learnability questions
about Boolean formulas; we refer the reader to [9] for details. In this context, it would
be interesting to know whether, or for which parameter k, Theorem 4.2 carries over to
the bi-valued case. While the coNP-membership clearly applies to the special case of a
bi-valued ρ, the hardness part of that proof uses a multiple-valued relation ρ and does
not allow us to derive a hardness result for the bi-valued case. In fact, the relations
ρ constructed in the proof of Theorem 4.2 from arbitrary 3COL instances are not bi-
valued and actually have unbounded domains dom(ρ) containing |ρ| + 3 elements5:
the “color constants” r, g, b, and the |ρ| tuple identiﬁers dt
i,j.
As noted in [7, 11], for k = 2 and bi-valued domains, the problem of deciding
whether sol(ΠSk(ρ)) = ρ is tractable. It can actually be reduced to 2SAT. But what
5Here |ρ| = |rel(ρ)| designates the number of tuples in the constraint relation of the constraint ρ.
18

about for values k ≥3? Dechter and Pearl made the following conjecture (Conjecture
3.27 in [9]):
Conjecture 4.2 (Dechter and Pearl [9]). For each ﬁxed positive integer k ≥3, decid-
ing for a bi-valued relation ρ whether sol(ΠSk(ρ)) = ρ is NP-hard.6
We are able to conﬁrm this conjecture.
Theorem 4.3. For each ﬁxed integer k ≥3, deciding for a single bi-valued constraint
ρ whether sol(ΠSk(ρ)) = ρ, that is, whether ρ is k-decomposable, is coNP-complete.
The rather involved proof of this theorem is given in Appendix B. The hardness
part is similar in spirit to the one of Theorem 4.2, except for two important changes
that are due to the requirement of a two-valued domain. First we encode 3SAT rather
than 3COL, in order to achieve a binary domain. However, there is still the problem of
the tuple identiﬁers (the values dt
i,j in the proof of Theorem 4.2). They are values from
an unbounded domain. We therefore use a speciﬁc bit-vector encoding that allows us
to represent tuple identiﬁers in binary format. This is, however, not totally trivial. The
difﬁculty lies in the fact that in the relations of the projection ΠSk(ρ) we do no longer
have full bit vectors at our disposal, but only k-bit projections of such bit vectors.
Sophisticated coding tricks are used for coping with this problem, and for obtaining a
correct reduction.
Theorem 4.3 has a corollary, which we here formulate in the terminology of Dechter
and Pearl [9].
Corollary 4.1. For ﬁxed k ≥3, the class of k-CNFs is not identiﬁable relative to all
CNFs (unless P=NP).
The above means the following. If a CNF φ (or, more generally, a Boolean function
φ) is given by the set of all its models (i.e., by a bi-valued relation, each tuple of which
corresponds to a model), then it is NP-hard to decide whether φ is equivalent to a
k-CNF. We refer the reader to [9] for a more detailed account of k-CNF identiﬁcation
and its equivalence to the problem of whether a bi-valued relation ρ is k-decomposable.
To conclude this topic, let us note that the representation of a Boolean function φ by
the explicit set of all its models, i.e., by all satisfying truth value assignments, is also
known as the onset of φ [32]. The above corollary thus states that, for ﬁxed k ≥3, it is
NP-hard to decide whether a Boolean function speciﬁed by its onset is equivalent to a
k-CNF.7
6Note that in [9], the parameter k is not explicitly required to be ﬁxed, however, from the context it is
clear that the present stronger version of the conjecture was actually intended. Moreover, Conjecture 3.27
in [9] was formulated in terms of k-CNFs rather than in a purely relational setting. To avoid additional
deﬁnitions and terminology, we have restated an equivalent relational formulation here. In particular, we
have replaced the term M(ΓSk(ρ)) in the original formulation by the equivalent term sol(ΠSk(ρ)).
7While we have not found this result in the literature on Boolean functions, we cannot totally exclude
that it has been independently derived, maybe in a different context or using a different formalism.
19

4.4. Further strengthening and tractability frontier
The technique used to prove Theorem 4.3 can be used to strengthen Theorem 4.2,
and to show that it actually also holds for tri-valued constraints ρ.
Theorem 4.4. For each ﬁxed integer k ≥2, deciding for a single tri-valued constraint
ρ whether sol(ΠSk(ρ)) = ρ, that is, whether ρ is k-decomposable, is coNP-complete.
The proof of this theorem is given in Appendix C. We there use a transformation
from 3COL from a graph G = (V, E) as described in the proof of Theorem 4.2 by
applying, in addition, similar vectorization techniques as in the proof of Theorem 4.3.
The above result, together with Theorem 4.3, and with the fact that the 2-representability
of binary networks is feasible in polynomial time, (see [7]), and with the facts that the
0-representability and 1-representability of each network and the k-representability of
1-valued networks are trivially tractable, gives us the following precise characterization
of the tractability of deciding whether sol(ΠSk(ρ)) = ρ:
Theorem 4.5. For the class of i-valued relations ρ, deciding sol(ΠSk(ρ)) = ρ is
tractable iff i = 1 or (i = 2 and k ≤2). In all other cases, the problem is coNP-
complete.
The following ﬁgure illustrates this tractability frontier.
Figure 3: Tractability Frontier for the k-decomposability of i-valued relations ρ.
5. Summary, discussion, and future research
In this paper we have tackled and solved long standing complexity problems re-
lated to minimal constraint networks:
• We solved an open problem posed by Gaur [11] in 1995, and later by Dechter [8],
by proving Dechter’s conjecture and showing that computing a solution to a min-
imal constraint network is NP-hard.
• We proved a conjecture on structure identiﬁcation in relational data made in
1992 by Dechter and Pearl [9]. In particular, we showed that for k ≥2, it is
coNP-complete to decide whether for a single constraint (or data relation) ρ,
sol(ΠSk(ρ)) = ρ, and thus whether ρ is k-decomposable.
20

• We also proved a reﬁned conjecture of Dechter and Pearl [9], showing that the
above problem remains coNP-hard even if ρ is a bi-valued constraint, in case
k ≥3. A consequence of this is the NP-hardness of identifying k-CNFs relative
to the class of all CNFs (when represented by the explicit enumeration of their
models).
• We ﬁnally proved that deciding whether sol(ΠSk(ρ)) = ρ is coNP-complete
for tri-valued relations and k ≥2. Together with our other results on structure
identiﬁcation, this allowed us to trace the precise tractability frontier for this
problem.
We wish to make clear that our hardness result about computing solutions to min-
imal networks does not mean that we think minimal networks are useless. To the
contrary, we are convinced that network minimality is a most desirable property when
a solution space needs to be efﬁciently represented for applications such as computer-
supported conﬁguration [10]. For example, a user interactively conﬁguring a PC con-
strains a relatively small number of variables, say, by specifying a maximum price, a
minimum CPU clock rate, and the desired hard disk type and capacity. The user then
wants to quickly know whether a solution exists, and if so, wants to see it. For a k-ary
minimal constraint network, the satisﬁability of queries involving k variables only can
be decided in polynomial time. However, our Theorem 3.1 states that, unless NP=P, in
case the query is satisﬁable, there is no way to witness the satisﬁability by a complete
solution (in our example, by exhibiting a completely conﬁgured PC satisfying the user
requests).
Our Theorem 3.1 thus unveils a certain deﬁciency of minimal networks, namely,
the failure of being able to exhibit full solutions. However, we have a strikingly simple
proposal for redressing this deﬁciency. Rather than just storing ℓ-tuples (where ℓ≤k)
in a k-ary minimal network Mk(N), we may store a full solution t+ with each ℓ-tuple,
where t+ coincides with t on the ℓvariables of t. Call this extended minimal network
M +
k (N). Complexity-wise, M +
k (N) is not harder to obtain than Mk(N). Moreover,
in practical terms, given that the known algorithms for computing Mk(N) from N
require to check for each ℓ-tuple t whether it occurs in some solution t+, why not just
memorize t+ on the ﬂy for each “good” tuple t? Note also that the size of M +
k (N)
is still polynomial, and at most by a factor |var(N)| larger than the size of Mk(N).
One may even go further and store not just a single solution, but the K best solutions
(according to some predeﬁned preference ordering) whose values coincide with those
of t with each tuple t of Mk(N). This allows one to answer top K queries with at most
k variables in polynomial time, once Mk(N) has been compiled. An example would
be: show me the 5 cheapest laptops fulﬁlling φ, where φ constrains k variables only.
For practical applications it is not always optimal to consider the complete schemas
Sk as deﬁned here. In the conference version [17] of this paper, Sk was deﬁned to con-
tain only all exactly k-ary relations over a given set of variables, rather than all at most
k-ary relations. It is easy to see that the relations with scopes of fewer than k variables
are redundant and can indeed be omitted (they can always be obtained via projections
from the exactly k-ary relations). The only reason why we used the complete schemas
in the present journal version is that we wanted to use exactly the same deﬁnition as
in the standard references [26, 8]. However, yet more liberal deﬁnitions are possible.
21

For example, Lecoutre [22] deﬁnes a constraint network N over an arbitrary schema
S to be minimal if N = ΠS(sol(N)). Clearly, all our complexity bounds carry over
to this more liberal setting: the lower bounds are directly inhererited, as all instances
in our settings are also instances of the more liberal setting, and the upper bounds are
obtained by a trivial adaptation of the proofs of our existing upper bounds.
An interesting problem for future research is the following. We may issue queries of
the following form against M +
k (N): SELECT A SOLUTION WHERE φ. Here φ is
some Boolean combination on constraints on the variables of N. Queries, where φ is a
simple combination of range restrictions on k variables can be answered in polynomial
time. But there are much more complicated queries that can be answered efﬁciently, for
example, queries that involve aggregate functions and/or re-use of quantiﬁed variables.
It would thus be nice and useful to identify very large classes of queries to M +
k (N) for
which a single solution – if it exists – can be found in polynomial time.
Another relevant research problem is related to the projection ΠS∗(sol(N)) of the
solution sol(N) of a (not necessarily binary) constraint network N to a user-deﬁned
schema S∗, and to the further use of the schema S∗for distributed constraint solving.
The projection of the solution space to speciﬁc sets of variables is used in the context
of system conﬁguration, when a system is jointly conﬁgured by a number of engineers,
each having access to a projection of the solution space only [33]. The problem of com-
puting a solution ΠS∗(sol(N)) is generally NP-hard, and remains NP-hard in many
special cases, e.g. if N is binary and, at the same time S∗= S2 (see Theorem 3.1).
We would like to investigate relevant restrictions that make this problem tractable. For
some restrictions, this is already known. For example, if S∗has bounded hypertree
width [16, 15, 3], then this problem becomes tractable. If S∗has bounded hinge width,
then computing a solution can even be done in a backtrack-free manner, see Section 3
of [18]. Note that bounded hinge width is a stronger restriction than bounded hypertree
width; for a comparison of these and other hypergraph restrictions, see [14]. Other de-
compositions that lead to backtrack solution search are the world-set decompositions
discussed in [28] and further generalized in [29]. These decompositions are based on
Cartesian products rather than on joins, therefore, computing solutions is easier than
with project-join decompositions.
There is also the problem of computing the desired projections without computing
the possibly very large relation sol(N), and, as a special case, computing the minimal
constraint network M(N) from a given network N. More formally, we would like to
compute ΠS∗(sol(N)) from N in polynomial space as efﬁciently as possible, assuming
the relations of S∗are all of bounded arity. There are already promising approaches
to this problem in the literature. In [12, 13], conﬂict-driven answer set programming
(ASP) techniques are used for this task. In [33], projections of sol(N) are computed via
a SAT solver, and it is shown that this method is feasible for large datasets stemming
from the automotive industry. However, we expect that a structural analysis of the
original network N and of the desired projection schema S∗could further help to speed
up this computation.
22

Appendix A. Proof of the Symmetry Lemma
Lemma 3.1 [Symmetry Lemma] For each ﬁxed integer k ≥1, there is a polynomial-
time transformation T that transforms each 3SAT instance C into a k-supersymmetric
instance C∗such that C is satisﬁable iff C∗is satisﬁable.
Proof. We ﬁrst prove the lemma for k = 2. Consider the given 3SAT instance C. Cre-
ate for each propositional variable p ∈propvar(C) a set New(p) = {p1, p2, p3, p4, p5}
of fresh propositional variables. Let Disj+(p) be the set of all disjunctions of three
distinct positive atoms from New(p) and let Disj−(p) be the set of all disjunctions of
three distinct negative literals corresponding to atoms in New(p). Thus, for example
(p2 ∨p4 ∨p5) ∈Disj+(p) and ( ¯p1 ∨¯p4 ∨¯p5) ∈Disj−(p). Note that Disj+(p)
and Disj−(p) each have exactly
 5
3

= 10 elements (we do not distinguish between
syntactic variants of equivalent clauses containing the same literals).
Consider the following transformation T, which eliminates all original literals from
C, yielding C∗:
Function T:
BEGIN C′ := C.
WHILE propvar(C) ∩propvar(C′) ̸= ∅DO
{ pick any p ∈propvar(C) ∩propvar(C′); C′ := elim(C′, p)};
Output(C′)
END.
Here elim(C′, p) is obtained from C′ and p as follows:
FOR each clause K of C′ in which p occurs positively or negatively DO
BEGIN
let δ be the disjunction of all literals in K different from p and from ¬p;8
if p occurs positively in K, replace K in C′ by the conjunction Γ+(K) of all clauses
of the form α ∨δ, where α ∈Disj+(p);
if p occurs negatively in K, replace K in C′ by the conjunction Γ−(K) of all clauses
of the form α ∨δ, where α ∈Disj−(p);
END.
Let C∗= T(C) be the ﬁnal result of T. C∗contains no original variable from
propvar(C). Note that C∗can be computed in polynomial time from C. In fact,
note that every clause of three literals of C gives rise to exactly
 5
3
3 = 103 = 1000
clauses of 9 literals each in C∗. While computing C∗from C, we can thus replace each
3-literal clause of C at once and independently by the corresponding 1000 clauses.
Similar direct replacements (but with fewer result clauses) are, of course, possible for
8An empty δ is equal to false, and it is understood that α ∨false is simply α.
23

two-literal and one-literal clauses of C. Assuming appropriate data structures, the
transformation from C to C∗can thus actually be done in linear time.
We now need to prove (1) that C∗is satisﬁable iff C is and (2) that C∗is 2-
supersymmetric.
Fact 1: C∗is satisﬁable iff C is. We will actually prove more than we need here. In
fact, our proof of Fact 1 below also shows that a satisfying assignment to C can be
transformed into many satisfying assignments to C∗. We will use this, when we come
to prove supersymmetry in Fact 2. We prove Fact 1 by showing that, when at each
step of algorithm T, C′ is transformed into its next value C′′ = elim(C′, p), then C′
and C′′ are satisfaction-equivalent. Fact 1 then follows by induction. Assume C′ is
satisﬁed via a truth value assignment τ ′. Then let τ ′′ be any truth value assignment to
the propositional variables of C′′ with the following properties:
• For each propositional variable q of C′′ different from p, τ ′′(q) = τ ′(q);
• if τ ′(p) = true, then at least 3 of the variables in New(p) are set true by τ ′′, and
• if τ ′(p) = false, then at most two of the variables in New(p) are set true by τ ′′
(and at least three are thus set false).
By deﬁnition of C′′, τ ′′ must satisfy C′′. In fact, assume ﬁrst τ ′(p) = true. Let K
be a clause of C in which p occurs positively. Then, given that at least three variables
in New(p) are set true by τ ′′, each element of Disj+(p) must have at least one atom
made true by τ ′′, and thus each of the clauses of Γ+(K) of C′′ evaluates to true via
τ ′′. All other clauses of C′′ stem from clauses of C′ that were made true by literals
corresponding to an atom q different from p. But, by deﬁnition of τ, these literals keep
their truth values, and hence make the clauses true. In summary, all clauses of C′′
are satisﬁed by τ ′′. In a very similar way it is shown shown that τ ′′ satisﬁes C′′ if,
τ ′(p) = false.
Vice versa, assume some truth value assignment τ ′′ satisﬁes C′′. Then it is not hard to
see that C′ must be satisﬁed by the truth value assignment τ ′ to C′ deﬁned as follows:
If a majority (i.e. 3 or more) of the ﬁve atoms in New(p) are made true via τ ′′, then
let τ ′(p) = true, otherwise let τ ′(p) = false; moreover, for all propositional variables
q ̸∈New(p), let τ ′(q) = τ ′′(q).
To see that τ ′ satisﬁes C′, consider ﬁrst the case that three or more of the propositional
variables of New(p) are assigned true by τ ′′. Note that all clauses of C′ that neither
contain p nor ¯p are trivially satisﬁed by τ ′, as τ ′ and τ ′′ coincide on their atoms. Now
let us consider any clause K of C′ in which p occurs positively. Then the only clauses
that contain positive occurrences of elements of New(p) of C′′ are the sets Γ+(K).
If τ ′′ is such that it makes at least three of the ﬁve atoms in New(p) true, then any
clause in Γ+(K) is made true by atoms of New(p). Thus when replacing these atoms
by p and assigning p true, the resulting clause K remains true. Now consider a clause
K = ¯p ∨δ of C′ in which p occurs negatively. The only clauses containing negative
New(p)-literals in C′′ are, by deﬁnition of C′′, those in Γ−(K). Recall we assumed
that that τ ′′ satisﬁes at least three distinct atoms from New(p). Let three of these
satisﬁed atoms be pi, pj, and pk. By deﬁnition, Γ−(K) contains a clause of the form
¯pi ∨¯pj ∨¯pk ∨δ. Given that this clause is satisﬁed by τ ′′, but τ ′′ falsiﬁes ¯pi ∨¯pj ∨¯pk,
24

δ is satisﬁed by τ ′′, and since δ contains no New(p)-literals, δ is also satisﬁed by τ ′.
Therefore, K = ¯p∨δ is satisﬁed by τ ′. This concludes the case where three or more of
the propositional variables of New(p) are assigned true by τ ′′. The case where three or
more of the propositional variables of New(p) are assigned false by τ ′′ is completely
symmetric, and can thus be settled in a totally similar way. ♦
Fact 2: Proof that C∗is 2-supersymmetric. Assume C∗is satisﬁable by some truth
value assignment η. Then C is satisﬁable by some truth value assignment τ, and
thus C∗is satisﬁable by some truth value assignment τ ∗constructed inductively as
described in the proof of Fact 1. Let us have a closer look at the inductive construc-
tion used to obtain τ ∗in Fact 1. For any initially ﬁxed pair of propositional variables
pi, qj ∈propvar(C∗), where 1 ≤i, j ≤5, the construction of τ ∗gives us a very large
degree of freedom for chosing τ ∗. Actually, the construction is so general, that it allows
us to let pi, qj take on any arbitrary truth value assignment among of the four possible
joint truth value assignments. In fact, however we choose the truth value assignments
for two among the variables in {p1, . . . , p5, q1, . . . , q5}, there is always enough ﬂexi-
bility for assigning the remaining variables in this set some truth values that ensure that
the majority of variables has the truth value required by the proof of Fact 1 for repre-
senting the original truth value of p via τ ′. (This holds even in case p and q are one and
the same variable, and we thus want to force two elements from {p1, . . . , p5} to take
on some truth values, see the second example below.) Let us give two examples that il-
lustrate the two characteristic cases to consider. First, assume p and q are distinct and τ
satisﬁes p and falsiﬁes q. We would like to construct, for example, a truth value assign-
ment τ ∗that falsiﬁes p2 and simultaneously satisﬁes q4. In constructing τ ∗, the only
requirements on New(p) and New(q) are that more than three variables from New(p)
need to be satisﬁed by τ ∗, but no more than two from New(q) need to be satisﬁed by
τ ∗. For instance, we may then set τ ∗(p1) = τ ∗(p3) = τ ∗(p4) = τ ∗(p5) = true and
τ ∗(p2) = false and τ ∗(q1) = τ ∗(q2) = τ ∗(q3) = τ ∗(q5) = false and τ ∗(q4) = true.
This achieves the desired truth value assignment to p2 and q4. An extension to a full
satisfying truth value assignment τ ∗for C∗is guaranteed. Now, as a second example,
assume that τ(p) = false, but we would like τ(p1) and τ(p2) to be simultaneously true
in a truth value assignment satisfying C∗. Note that in this case, the only requirement
on New(p) in the construction of τ ∗is that at most two atoms from New(p) must be
assigned true. Here we have a single option only: set τ ∗(p1) = τ ∗(p2) = true and
τ ∗(p3) = τ ∗(p4) = τ ∗(p5) = false. This option works perfectly, and assigns the
desired truth values to p1 and p2. In summary, C∗is 2-supersymmetric. ♦
The proof for k > 2 is totally analogous, except for the following modiﬁcations:
• Instead of creating for each propositional variable p ∈propvar(C) a set
New(p) = {p1, p2, . . . , p5} of ﬁve new variables, we now create a set
New(p) = {p1, p2, . . . , p2k+1} of 2k + 1 new propositional variables.
• The set Disj+(p) is now deﬁned as the set of all disjunctions of k + 1 posi-
tive atoms from New(p). Similarly, Disj−(p) is now deﬁned as the set of all
disjunctions of k + 1 negative literals obtained by negating atoms from New(p).
• We replace the numbers 2 and 3 by k and k + 1, respectively.
25

• We note that now each three-literal clause of C is replaced no longer by
 5
3
3
clauses but by
 2k+1
k+1
3 clauses.
• We note that the resulting clause set C∗is now a 3(k + 1)-SAT instance.
It is easy to see that the proofs of Fact 1 and Fact 2 above go through with these
modiﬁcations.
Finally, let us recall that any 2-supersymmetric SAT instance is trivially also 1-
supersymmetric, which settles the theorem for k = 1.
Appendix B. Proof of Theorem 4.3
Theorem 4.3 For each ﬁxed integer k ≥3, deciding for a single bi-valued constraint
ρ whether sol(ΠSk(ρ)) = ρ, that is, whether ρ is k-decomposable, is coNP-complete.
Proof. It sufﬁces to show coNP-hardness, as membership in coNP already follows
from Theorem 4.2. We ﬁrst prove coNP-hardness for the case k = 3.
Consider a nonemptyt 3SAT instance C = {C1, . . . , Cm} over a set propvar(C) =
{p1, . . . , pn} of propositional variables, where each Ci is a clause containing precisely
3 literals whose corresponding atoms are mutually distinct.
Let us ﬁrst deﬁne two numbers r0 and r from C, whose meaning and use will
become clear later on. Let r0 denote the number of 3-element sets {pa, pb, pc} of
mutually distinct propositional variables pa, pb, pc ∈propvar(C) that do not all three
jointly appear in any clause of C. Note that r0 ≤8
 n
3

. Let, moreover, r = 7m + r0.
Clearly, r is polynomially bounded in the size of C, as r ≤7m + 8
 n
3

.
We construct in polynomial time a bi-valued constraint ρ of r elements, such that
sol(ΠSk(ρ)) ̸= ρ iff C is satisﬁable. The scope scope(ρ) of ρ contains for each pi ∈
propvar(C) a list of r + 1 variables X0
i , X1
i , . . . , Xr
i . Intuitively, in each tuple t of
rel(ρ), for each 1 ≤i ≤n, the values assigned to the variables X0
i , X1
i , . . . , Xr
i either
shall encode a truth value assignment to pi, in which case all variables of this list will
be assigned the same value, zero or one, or these values shall encode a tuple identiﬁer
for the tuple in which they occur. A tuple identiﬁer for the s-th tuple of rel(ρ) assigns
the value zero to all Xj
i where j ≤s and the value one to all Xj
i where j ≥s. This
will be made more formal below.
The constraint relation rel(ρ) consists of two groups of tuples:
Clause-induced tuples. These are 7m tuples, namely, seven for each clause Ch, 1 ≤
h ≤m. These tuples are numbered from 1 to 7m. Each of these tuples de-
scribes one of the 7 legal truth value assignments (out of 8 possible) to the three
propositional variables of a clause Ch ∈C. For each clause Ch, 1 ≤h ≤m,
and each truth value assignment τj ∈propvar(Ch) −→{0, 1}, among all 7
permitted truth value assignments to the propositional variables of Ch, where
1 ≤j ≤7, rel(ρ) contains precisely one tuple tj
h, whose components are de-
scribed as follows. For each pi ∈propvar(Ch), tj
h[X0
i ] = tj
h[X1
i ] = tj
h[X2
i ] =
26

· · · = tj
h[Xr
i ] = τj(pi). Moreover, for each pi ∈propvar(C) −propvar(Ch),
tj
h[X0
i ] = 0, and the assignments to X1
i . . . Xr
i jointly constitute a unique tuple
identiﬁer that exclusively appears in the tuple tj
h, and that encodes the tuple num-
ber s of the tuple tj
h (namely s = 7(h −1) + j) in a very simple way: It assigns
0 to all Xs′
i where 0 ≤s′ < s and 1 to all variables Xs′
i where s ≤s′ ≤r.
Auxiliary tuples These are no more than 8
 n
3

tuples: one for each 3-element set
{pa, pb, pc} of mutually distinct propositional variables pa, pb, pc ∈propvar(C)
that do not all three jointly appear in any clause of C. These auxiliary tuples are
numbered from 7m + 1 to r, where r ≤7m + 8
 n
3

is the total number of tu-
ples in ρ. Essentially, the eight auxiliary tuples associated with the above sets
{pa, pb, pc} each encode one of the eight truth value assignments σ1, . . . , σ8 to
the propositional variables pa, pb, and pc. These tuples thus do not encode effec-
tive constraints, as they reﬂect any arbitrary truth value assignment pa, pb, and
pc, but they will be needed for technical reasons. More formally, for each set
S = {pa, pb, pc} as above, and each truth value assignment σ to {pa, pb, pc},
rel(ρ) contains a tuple tσ
S, whose components are described as follows. For each
pi ∈S, tσ
S[X0
i ] = tσ
S[X1
i ] = tσ
s [X2
i ] = · · · = tσ
S[Xr
i ] = σ(pi). Moreover, for
each pi ∈propvar(C) −S, tσ
S[X0
i ] = 0, and the assignments to X1
i . . . Xr
i , just
as before, jointly constitute a unique tuple-identiﬁer that exclusively appears in
the tuple tσ
S, and that encodes the tuple number s of the tuple tσ
S by assigning 0
to all Xs′
i where s′ < s and 1 to all variables Xs′
i where s′ ≥s.
This concludes the deﬁnition of ρ.
CLAIM: sol(ΠS3(ρ)) ̸= ρ iff C is satisﬁable.
We ﬁrst prove the if-part of the claim. Assume C is satisﬁable. Thus there exists
a truth value assignment τ to propvar(C) satisfying C. We show that sol(ΠS3(ρ))
then must contain the tuple t ̸∈rel(ρ) deﬁned as follows. For each 1 ≤i ≤n,
t[X0
i ] = t[X1
i ] = t[X2
i ] = · · · = t[Xr
i ] = τ(pi). To see this, it sufﬁces to observe that
the projection t[S] of t to any set S = {Xu
a , Xv
b , Xw
c } of three distinct variables from
scope(ρ) is contained in the corresponding relation ΠS(ρ) of ΠS3(ρ).
In fact, if the atoms pa, pb and pc jointly occur in a clause Ch of C, then, the tuple
t′ in rel(ρ) induced by Ch for truth value assignment τ[pa, pb, pc] coincides in its S-
components with the tuple t, in other terms, t′[S] = t[S]. Hence t[S] is contained in
the relation ΠS(ρ) of ΠS3(ρ). Moreover, in case pa, pb and pc do not jointly occur in a
clause of C, then there must exist an auxiliary tuple t′ such that t′[S] = t[S], and thus,
again, t[S] is contained in the relation ΠS(ρ) of ΠS3(ρ). In summary, t is contained in
the join of the exactly ternary relations of ΠS3(ρ). As is easily veriﬁed, the binary and
unary relations of ΠS3(ρ) are weaker than the ternary ones, and actually redundant; the
join of all constraints with precisely three variables is in fact equal to sol(ΠS3(ρ)). It
follows that t is contained in the join of ΠS3(ρ), which is sol(ΠS3(ρ)). However, t
is not in rel(ρ) because t does not contain any tuple identiﬁer, whereas each tuple of
rel(ρ) does.
It now remains to show that, whenever sol(ΠS3(ρ)) contains a tuple t ̸∈rel(ρ),
then t corresponds to a satisfying truth value assignment for C, and C is thus satisﬁable.
27

Let t be such a tuple. We ﬁrst show that for each 1 ≤i ≤n and each 1 ≤v ≤r and
1 ≤w ≤r it must hold that t[Xv
i ] = t[Xw
i ], thus all bits of t[X0
i , X1
i , . . . , Xr
i ] must
be equal. We prove this by showing that this bit-vector cannot have two consecutive
bits of different value.
• Assume that for some 0 < ℓ≤r, t[Xℓ−1
i
] = 0 while t[Xℓ
i ] = 1. By con-
struction, rel(ρ) contains only a single tuple t′ for which t′[Xℓ−1
i
] = 0 but
t′[Xℓ
i ] = 1, namely the tuple numbered ℓ. Therefore, in each relation rel(c)
of any constraint c of ΠS3(ρ) where scope(c) contains Xℓ−1
i
, Xℓ
i and any other
variable Xu
j , there is thus a single tuple fc having fc[Xℓ−1
i
] = 0 and fc[Xℓ
i ] = 1.
It follows that sol(ΠS3(ρ)) contains a unique tuple whose Xℓ−1
i
-value is zero
and whose Xℓ
i -value is one, namely the tuple t′. Therefore t = t′, which contra-
dicts our assumption that t ̸∈rel(ρ).
• Assume that for some 0 < ℓ≤r, t[Xℓ−1
i
] = 1 while t[Xℓ
i ] = 0. Observe that,
by construction, rel(ρ) does not contain a single tuple t′ for which t′[Xℓ−1
i
] =
1 while t′[Xℓ
i ] = 0. In fact, rel(ρ) was carefully constructed so that the bit
values in the sequences t′[X0
i , X1
i , . . . , Xr
i ] never decrease in any of its tuples.
Therefore, in no relation rel(c) of any constraint c of ΠS3(ρ) where scope(c)
contains Xℓ−1
i
, Xℓ
i and any other variable Xu
j , there is thus a tuple f having
f[Xℓ−1
i
] = 1 and f[Xℓ
i ] = 0. It follows that the join sol(ΠS3(ρ)) contains no
tuple whose Xℓ−1
i
-value is one and whose Xℓ
i -value is zero. Contradiction.
We have thus established that for 1 ≤i ≤n, all bits of t[X0
i , X1
i , . . . , Xr
i ] must be
equal. Let τ be the truth value assignment that for 1 ≤i ≤n associates to each pi the
truth value t[X0
i ] = t[X1
i ] = · · · = t[Xr
i ]. Let Ch be any clause of C. Let the atoms
of Ch be pa, pb and pc. Deﬁne:
X(a) := X0
a if τ(pa) = 1 and X(a) := Xr
a if τ(pa) = 0;
X(b) := X0
b if τ(pb) = 1 and X(b) := Xr
b if τ(pb) = 0;
X(c) := X0
c if τ(pc) = 1 and X(c) := Xr
c , if τ(pc) = 0.
Consider the constraint q of ΠS3(ρ) having ⟨X(a), X(b), X(c)⟩as scope. This con-
straint must have a tuple tq = ⟨τ(pa), τ(pb), τ(pc)⟩, which is obviously identical to
t[X(a), X(b), X(c)]. There is, therefore, a tuple t′ ∈rel(ρ) such that
t′[X(a), X(b), X(c)] = ⟨τ(pa), τ(pb), τ(pc)⟩.
Given the speciﬁc values and positions of X(a), X(b), and X(c) in t′, it is easily seen
that the tuple t′ must belong to the group of clause-induced tuples, and more specif-
ically, t′ is induced by precisely clause Ch and truth value assignment τ[pa, pb, pc].
To see this, let us ﬁrst recall that in our our encoding of a tuple identiﬁer the ﬁrst
bit (i.e., bit 0) is always 0 and the last bit (i.e., bit r) is always 1, which is never
the case for the encoding of a truth value. Now consider τ(pa). If τ(pa) = 0, then
t(X(a)) = t′(X(a)) = t′(Xr
a) = 0. If X(a) = Xr
a were part of a tuple-identiﬁer, then
t[X(a)], which is identical to t[Xr
a], could never have value zero, because, bit r of a
tuple identiﬁer is always 1. Therefore, X(a) must be part of a (representation of a) truth
value assignment. Similarly, if τ(pa) = 1, then t(X(a)) = t′(X(a)) = t′(X0
a) = 1.
28

If X(a) = X0
a were part of a tuple-identiﬁer, t[X(a)] could never have value one, be-
cause all tuple identiﬁers have value zero at their bit position of index zero. Therefore,
again, X(a) must be part of a (representation of a) truth value assignment. Exactly
the same reasoning applies to X(b) and X(c). In summary, t′ is a tuple of ρ that ex-
actly describes truth value assignment τ restricted to the three propositional variables
pa, pb, and pc. Given that these propositional variables jointly occur in clause Ch, t′
is a clause-induced tuple, and τ is a “legal” truth-value assignment that satisﬁes Ch.
Given that Ch was an arbitrary clause of C, τ satisﬁes all clauses of C, and thus C is
satisﬁable. We are done for k = 3. The proof is easily modiﬁed to hold for any larger
ﬁxed value k. It sufﬁces, for example, to start with kSAT instead of 3SAT. The proof
goes through with the obvious adjustments to the numeric parameters.
Appendix C. Proof of Theorem 4.4
Theorem 4.4 For each ﬁxed integer k ≥2, deciding for a single tri-valued constraint
ρ whether sol(ΠSk(ρ)) = ρ, that is, whether ρ is k-decomposable, is coNP-complete.
Proof. For all constants k, the membership in coNP of our decision problem is already
covered by (the upper bound in) Theorem 4.2. Moreover, the coNP-hardness for k ≥3
is already proven in Theorem 4.3, as bi-valued relations are trivially also k-valued
relations (where the additional k-2 values appear in the domains but not in the actual
constraint relations). Thus, what remains to be done is to prove coNP-hardness for
k = 2.
We use a transformation from 3COL from a graph G = (V, E) as described in
the proof of Theorem 4.2 by applying similar vectorization techniques as in the proof
of Theorem 4.3. In particular, consider the relation ρ obtained from the 3-colability
network N3COL in the hardness part of the proof of Theorem 4.2, and let s = |ρ| be
the cardinality of ρ. Rather than transforming N3COL (and thus the graph G) to ρ, we
will transform it to a tri-valued constraint ρ∗of the same cardinality s, that closely
resembles ρ. To this aim, for 1 ≤i ≤n, every scope variable Xi of N3COL (and thus of
ρ) is replaced by a block of s + 1 variables X0
i , . . . , Xs
i , which either encodes a color
from {r, g, b}, or a tuple identiﬁer. We here use the following encoding:
• Color red is encoded as a block consisting of s + 1 consecutive positions having
value r.
• Color green is encoded as a block consisting of s+1 consecutive positions having
value g.
• Color blue is encoded by a leading b (as an assignment to X0
i ) followed by a
block containing s consecutive positions having value r.
• The tuple identiﬁer for tuple number d is a block of length s + 1 starting with a
sequence of one or more r elements, having a b in the position corresponding to
Xd
i , followed by g elements. In other terms, this tuple identiﬁer is a sequence of
length s + 1 of the form r, . . . , r, b, g, . . . , g, whose d + 1st component is b.
29

The new relation ρ∗thus has dom(ρ∗) = {r, g, b} and
scope(ρ∗) = (X0
1, X1
1, . . . , Xs
1, X0
2, X1
2, . . . , Xs
2, . . . . . . , X0
n, X1
n, . . . , Xs
n).
CLAIM: G is 3-colorable iff sol(ΠS2(ρ∗)) −rel(ρ∗) is non-empty.
The if-part is not hard to see from our construction. In fact, each correct graph
coloring τ gives rise to a tuple t in sol(ΠS2(ρ∗))−rel(ρ∗) whose vectorized component
t[X0
i , . . . , Xs
i ] representing vertex vi consists of the encoding of the color τ(vi).
Let us now prove the only-if part. Assume there exists a tuple t in sol(ΠS2(ρ∗)) −
rel(ρ∗). We can show by similar arguments as in the proof of Theorem 4.3 that G must
be 3-colorable. This is shown by the following successively derived facts:
1. Tuple t can never have value b in an Xj
i -component with j ̸= 0. In fact, if it
had a b assigned to a variable Xℓ
i with ℓ̸= 0, this assignment would occur in a
single tuple t′ of rel(ρ∗) only. Therefore in each relation rel(c) of any constraint
c of ΠS2(ρ∗) where scope(c) contains Xℓ
i would contain a single tuple having
Xℓ
i = b. But this means that the join of all relations ΠS2(ρ∗) contains a single
tuple having Xℓ
i = b, namely t′ itself. But would imply t = t′ ∈rel(ρ∗) which
is a contradiction.
2. No pair of consecutive values of any block t[X1
i , . . . , Xs
i ], for 1 ≤i ≤n can
coincide with rg or gr. In fact, by construction, neither rg or gr occur as con-
secutive values in two consecutive columns labeled Xℓ
i , Xℓ+1
i
, of rel(ρ∗), where
ℓ≥1. Therefore, no relation rel(c) of any constraint c of ΠS2(ρ∗), whose scope
is Xℓ
i , Xℓ+1
i
, where ℓ≥1, contains tuple rg or tuple gr. It follows that the
join sol(ΠS2(ρ∗)) cannot contain any tuple having rg or tuple gr in consecutive
components corresponding to the variables (attributes) Xℓ
i , Xℓ+1
i
, where ℓ≥1.
Given that t ∈sol(ΠS2(ρ∗)), the same follows for tuple t.
3. For each 1 ≤i ≤n, the block t[X1
i , . . . , Xs
i ] is made entirely of the same value,
namely, either r or g. This follows immediately from the above facts 1 and 2.
4. For 1 ≤i ≤n, each block of values t[X0
i , . . . , Xs
i ] precisely encodes one of the
colors red, green, or blue, according to our encoding scheme. To show this, it is
sufﬁcient to show that for 1 ≤i ≤n, if t[X1
i ] = r then t[X0
i ] ∈{r, b}, and if
t[X1
i ] = g then t[X0
i ] = g. This is shown just in the same way as Fact 2 above.
By construction of ρ∗, the same property holds for each tuple of ρ∗, and thus
for all the constraints with scope {X0
i , X1
i } of ΠS2(ρ∗). Therefore, the property
must also hold for each tuple of the join sol(ΠS2(ρ∗)) of ΠS2(ρ∗), and thus, in
particular, for t.
5. For each edge ⟨va, vb⟩∈E, the blocks t[X0
a, . . . Xs
a] and t[X0
b , . . . Xs
b ] represent
different colors. To show this, deﬁne X(a) := Xs
a if X0
a = r and X(a) := X0
a
otherwise. Similarly, deﬁne X(b) := Xs
b if X0
b = r and X(b) := X0
b other-
wise. Let q be the constraint of ΠS2(ρ∗) with scope(q) = {X(a), X(b)}. Clearly
t[X(a), X(b)] = q[X(a), X(b)]. Thus there is a tuple t′ ∈rel(ρ∗) such that
t[X(a), X(b)] = t′[X(a), X(b)]. However, due to the particular value-position
combinations, neither t′[X(a)] nor t′[X(b)] can be part of a tuple-identiﬁer, and
they thus jointly represent a legal coloring of the edge ⟨va, vb⟩of G. Since this
30

is true for all edges ⟨va, vb⟩of G, all edges of G are correctly colored by the
coloring expressed by tuple t.
Therefore, G is 3-colorable. This concludes the proof of the only-if part of our claim,
and thus the proof of our theorem.
Acknowledgments Work funded by EPSRC Grant EP/G055114/1 “Constraint Satis-
faction for Conﬁguration: Logical Fundamentals, Algorithms, and Complexity”. The
author is a James Martin Senior Research Fellow. He thanks V. B´ar´any, C. Bessiere,
D. Cohen, R. Dechter, D. Gaur, J. Petke, M. Vardi, M. Yannakakis, S. ˇZivn´y, and the
referees of both the conference and the journal version for useful comments and/or
pointers to earlier work.
