Abstract
           Most of the web user’s requirements are 
search or navigation time and getting correctly 
matched result. These constrains can be satisfied 
with some additional modules attached to the 
existing search engines and web servers. This paper 
proposes that powerful architecture for search 
engines with the title of Probabilistic Semantic 
Web Mining named from the methods used.
          With the increase of larger and larger 
collection of various data resources on the World 
Wide Web (WWW), Web Mining has become one 
of the most important requirements for the web 
users. Web servers will store various formats of 
data including text, image, audio, video etc., but 
servers can not identify the contents of the data.                
These search techniques can be improved by 
adding some special techniques including semantic 
web mining and probabilistic analysis to get more 
accurate results. 
        Semantic web mining technique can provide 
meaningful search of data resources by eliminating 
useless information with mining process. In this 
technique 
web 
servers 
will 
maintain 
Meta 
information of each and every data resources 
available in that particular web server. This will 
help the search engine to retrieve information that 
is relevant to user given input string.
            This paper proposing the idea of combing 
these two techniques Semantic web mining and 
Probabilistic analysis for efficient and accurate 
search results of web mining. SPF can be 
calculated by considering both semantic accuracy 
and syntactic accuracy of data with the input string. 
This will be the deciding factor for producing 
results.  
1. Concept of Data Mining
1.1 Data, Information, and Knowledge 
1.1.1 Data
Data are any facts, numbers, or text that 
can be processed 
by a 
computer. Today, 
organizations are accumulating vast and growing 
amounts of data in different formats and different 
databases. This includes: 

Operational or transactional data such as, 
sales, cost, inventory, payroll, and accounting

No operational data, such as industry 
sales, forecast data, and macro economic data 

Meta data - data about the data itself, such 
as logical database design or data dictionary 
definitions 
1.1.2 Information
The patterns, associations, or relationships 
among all this data can provide information. For 
example, analysis of retail point of sale transaction 
data can yield information on which products are 
selling and when. 
1.1.3 Knowledge
Information 
can 
be 
converted 
into 
knowledge about historical patterns and future 
trends. For example, summary information on retail 
supermarket sales can be analyzed in light of 
promotional efforts to provide knowledge of 
consumer buying behavior. Thus, a manufacturer 
or retailer could determine which items are most 
susceptible to promotional efforts. 
1.1.4 Data Warehouses 
Dramatic advances in data capture, 
processing power, data transmission, and storage 
capabilities are enabling organizations to integrate 
their various databases into data warehouses. Data 
warehousing is defined as a process of centralized 
          Probabilistic Semantic Web Mining
       Using Artificial Neural Analysis
      
1. T. KRISHNA KISHORE,               2.   T.SASI VARDHAN,           AND               3. N. LAKSHMI NARAYANA
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, 
Vol. 7, No. 3, March 2010 
294
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

data management and retrieval. Data warehousing, 
like data mining, is a relatively new term although 
the concept itself has been around for years. Data 
warehousing 
represents 
an 
ideal 
vision 
of 
maintaining 
a 
central 
repository 
of 
all 
organizational data. 
1.2 What can data mining do? 
Data mining is primarily used today by 
companies with a strong consumer focus - retail, 
financial, 
communication, 
and 
marketing 
organizations. It enables these companies to 
determine relationships among "internal" factors 
such as price, product positioning, or staff skills, 
and "external" factors such as economic indicators, 
competition, and customer demographics. And, it 
enables them to determine the impact on sales, 
customer 
satisfaction, 
and 
corporate 
profits. 
Finally, it enables them to "drill down" into 
summary information to view detail transactional 
data. 
With data mining, a retailer could use 
point-of-sale records of customer purchases to send 
targeted promotions based on an individual's 
purchase history. By mining demographic data 
from comment or warranty cards, the retailer could 
develop products and promotions to appeal to 
specific 
customer 
segments. 
For 
example, 
Blockbuster Entertainment mines its video rental 
history database to recommend rentals to individual 
customers. American Express can suggest products 
to its cardholders based on analysis of their 
monthly expenditures. 
1.3 How does data mining work? 
While large-scale information technology 
has been evolving separate transaction and 
analytical systems, data mining provides the link 
between the two. Data mining software analyzes 
relationships and patterns in stored transaction data 
based on open-ended user queries. Several types of 
analytical 
software 
are 
available: 
statistical, 
machine learning, and neural networks. Generally, 
any of four types of relationships are sought: 
Classes: Stored data is used to locate data in 
predetermined groups. For example, a restaurant 
chain could mine customer purchase data to 
determine when customers visit and what they 
typically order. This information could be used 
to increase traffic by having daily specials.
Clusters: Data items are grouped according to 
logical relationships or consumer preferences. 
For example, data can be mined to identify 
market segments or consumer affinities. 
Associations: Data can be mined to identify 
associations. The beer-diaper example is an 
example of associative mining. 
Sequential patterns: Data is mined to anticipate 
behavior patterns and trends. For example, an 
outdoor equipment retailer could predict the 
likelihood of a backpack being purchased based 
on a consumer's purchase of sleeping bags and 
hiking shoes. 
Data mining process includes various internal 
operations as shown in Fig 1
Fig 1: Data Mining Process
1.3.1 Data mining consists of five major 
elements: 

Extract, transform, and load transaction 
data onto the data warehouse system. 

Store 
and 
manage 
the 
data 
in 
a 
multidimensional database system. 

Provide data access to business analysts 
and information technology professionals. 

Analyze the data by application software. 
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, 
Vol. 7, No. 3, March 2010 
295
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 


Present the data in a useful format, such as 
a graph or table. 
1.3.2 Different levels of analysis are 
available: 
Artificial 
neural 
networks: 
Non-linear 
predictive models that learn through training and 
resemble biological neural networks in structure.
Genetic algorithms: Optimization techniques 
that use process such as genetic combination, 
mutation, and natural selection in a design based 
on the concepts of natural evolution. 
Decision trees: Tree-shaped structures that 
represent sets of decisions. These decisions 
generate rules for the classification of a dataset. 
Specific 
decision 
tree 
methods 
include 
Classification and Regression Trees (CART) and 
Chi Square Automatic Interaction Detection 
(CHAID). CART and CHAID are decision tree 
techniques used for classification of a dataset. 
They provide a set of rules that you can apply to 
a new (unclassified) dataset to predict which 
records will have a given outcome. CART 
segments a dataset by creating 2-way splits while 
CHAID segments using chi square tests to create 
multi-way splits. CART typically requires less 
data preparation than CHAID. 
Nearest neighbor method: A technique that 
classifies each record in a dataset based on a 
combination of the classes of the k record(s) 
most similar to it in a historical dataset (where k
1). Sometimes called the k-nearest neighbor 
technique. 
Rule induction: The extraction of useful if-then 
rules from data based on statistical significance. 
Data visualization: The visual interpretation of 
complex relationships in multidimensional data. 
Graphics tools are used to illustrate data 
relationships
1.3.3 Operations of Web Mining:

Data/information extraction: Our focus 
will be on extraction of structured data from Web 
pages, such as products and search
results. 
Extracting such data allows one to provide 
services. Two main types of techniques, machine 
learning and automatic extraction are covered. 

Web 
information 
integration 
and 
schema matching: Although the Web contains a 
huge amount of data, each web site (or even page) 
represents similar information differently. How to 
identify or match semantically similar data is a 
very important problem with many practical 
applications. 
Some 
existing 
techniques 
and 
problems are examined. 

Opinion extraction from online sources: 
There are many online opinion sources, e.g., 
customer reviews of products, forums, blogs and 
chat rooms. Mining opinions (especially consumer 
opinions) is of great importance for marketing 
intelligence and product benchmarking. We will 
introduce a few tasks and techniques to mine such 
sources. 

Knowledge 
synthesis: 
Concept 
hierarchies or ontology are useful in many 
applications. However, generating them manually 
is very time consuming. A few existing methods 
that explores the information redundancy of the 
Web will be presented. The main application is to 
synthesize and organize the pieces of information 
on the Web to give the user a coherent picture of 
the topic domain.. 

Segmenting Web pages and detecting 
noise: In many Web applications, one only wants 
the main content of the Web page without 
advertisements, navigation links, copyright notices. 
Automatically segmenting Web page to extract the 
main content of the pages is interesting problem. A 
number of interesting techniques have been 
proposed in the past few years. 
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, 
Vol. 7, No. 3, March 2010 
296
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

2. Types of Web Mining
Web 
Mining 
is 
the 
extraction 
of 
interesting and potentially useful patterns and 
implicit information from artifacts or activity 
related to the World Wide Web. There are roughly 
three knowledge discovery domains that pertain to 
web mining: Web Content Mining, Web Structure 
Mining, and Web Usage Mining. Web content 
mining is the process of extracting knowledge from 
the content of documents or their descriptions. Web 
document text mining, resource discovery based on 
concepts indexing or agent based technology may 
also fall in this category. Web structure mining is 
the process of inferring knowledge from the World
Wide Web organization and links between 
references and referents in the Web. Finally, web 
usage mining, also known as Web Log Mining, is 
the process of extracting interesting patterns in web 
access logs.2.1 Web Content Mining
Web content mining is an automatic 
process that goes beyond keyword extraction. Since 
the content of a text document presents no 
machine-readable semantic, some approaches have 
suggested to restructure the document content in a 
representation that could be exploited by machines. 
The usual approach to exploit known structure in 
documents is to use wrappers to map documents to 
some data model. Techniques using lexicons for 
content interpretation are yet to come. There are 
two groups of web content mining strategies: Those 
that directly mine the content of documents and 
those that improve on the content search of other 
tools like search engines.
2.2 Web Structure Mining
World
Wide Web can reveal more 
information than just the information contained in 
documents. For example, links pointing to a 
document indicate the popularity of the document, 
while links coming out of a document indicate the 
richness or perhaps the variety of topics covered in 
the 
document. 
This 
can 
be 
compared 
to 
bibliographical citations. When a paper is cited 
often, it ought to be important. The Page Rank and 
CLEVER 
methods 
take 
advantage 
of 
this 
information conveyed by the links to find pertinent 
web pages. 2.3 Web Usage Mining
Web servers record and accumulate data 
about user interactions whenever requests for 
resources are received. Analyzing the web access 
logs of deferent web sites can help understand the 
user behavior and the web structure, thereby 
improving the design of this colossal collection of 
resources. There are two main tendencies in Web 
Usage Mining driven by the applications of the 
discoveries: General Access Pattern Tracking and 
Customized Usage Tracking. The general access 
pattern tracking analyzes the web logs to 
understand access patterns and trends. These 
analyses can shed light on better structure and 
grouping of resource providers. Many web analysis 
tools existed but they are limited and usually 
unsatisfactory. We have designed a web log data 
mining tool, Weblog
Miner, and proposed 
techniques for using data mining and Online
Analytical Processing (OLAP) on treated and 
transformed web access files. Some scripts custom-
tailored for some sites may store additional 
information. However, for an effective web usage 
mining, an important 
g and data
Fig 2 : Types  of Web Mining
3. What is Semantic Web Mining?
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, 
Vol. 7, No. 3, March 2010 
297
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

The effort behind the Semantic Web is to 
add semantic annotation to Web documents in 
order to access knowledge instead of unstructured 
material, allowing knowledge to be managed in an 
automatic way. Web Mining can help to learn 
definitions 
of 
structures 
for 
knowledge 
organization (e. g., ontologies) and to provide the 
population of such knowledge structures.
All approaches discussed here are semi-
automatic. They assist the knowledge engineer in 
extracting the semantics, but cannot completely 
replace her. In order to obtain high-quality results, 
one cannot replace the human in the loop, as there 
is always a lot of tacit knowledge involved in the 
modeling process. A computer will never be able to 
fully consider background knowledge, experience, 
or social conventions. 
3.1 Ontology Learning:
Extracting ontology from the Web is a challenging 
task. One way is to engineer the ontology by hand, 
but this is quite an expensive way. The expression 
Towards Semantic Web Mining Ontology Learning 
was coined for the semi-automatic extraction of 
semantics from the Web in order to create ontology 
the techniques produce intermediate results which 
must
Fig 3: Ontology Mapping and Merging
finally 
be 
integrated 
in 
one 
machine-
understandable format, ex: ontology. 
3.2 Mapping and Merging Ontologies
With the growing usage of ontologies, the 
problem of overlapping knowledge in a common 
domain occurs more often and becomes critical. 
Domain-specific 
ontologies 
are 
modeled 
by 
multiple authors in multiple settings. These 
ontologies lay the foundation for building new 
domain-specific ontologies in similar domains by 
assembling and extending multiple ontologies from 
repositories. The process of ontology merging takes 
as input two (or more) source ontologies and 
returns a merged ontology based on the given 
source ontologies. Another method is FCA-Merge 
which merges ontologies following a bottom-up 
approach, offering a global structural description of 
the process.
D 
4. Architecture of Semantic Web Miner
In this semantic web miner architecture 
includes various components to perform syntactic 
as well as semantic analysis on the web resources 
for the given input string. At the same time each 
web server must contains one special module Meta 
Information Analyzer.
5. Features of Semantic Web Miner
Semantic web Miner Marjory considers 
the concept of time complexity of searching. In 
general search engines will need to spend more 
time in searching the web results by simple 
matching of given input string with the contents of 
each and every web resource 
F
Fig 4: Semantic Web Miner
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, 
Vol. 7, No. 3, March 2010 
298
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

6. What is Neural Network?
An Artificial Neural Network (ANN) is an 
information processing paradigm that is inspired by 
the way biological nervous systems, such as the 
brain, process information. The key element of this 
paradigm is the novel structure of the information 
processing system. It is composed of a large 
number 
of highly interconnected processing 
elements (neurons) working in unison to solve 
specific problems. ANNs, like people, learn by 
example. 
6.1 Why use neural networks?
Neural networks, with their remarkable ability to 
derive meaning from complicated or imprecise 
data, can be used to extract patterns and detect 
trends that are too complex to be noticed by either 
humans or other computer techniques.
Fig 5: Components of a neuron
Other advantages include: 
1.
Adaptive learning: An ability to learn how to 
do tasks based on the data given for training or 
initial experience. 
2.
Self-Organization: An ANN can create its own 
organization 
or 
representation 
of 
the 
information it receives during learning time. 
Real Time Operation: ANN computations may be 
carried out in parallel, and special 
hardware devices are being designed and
3.
manufactured which take advantage of this 
capability. 
4.
Fault Tolerance via Redundant Information 
Coding: Partial destruction of a network leads 
to 
the 
corresponding 
degradation 
of
performance. 
However, 
some 
network 
capabilities may be retained even with major 
network damage. 
6.2 How the Human Brain Learns?
In the human brain, a typical neuron 
collects signals from others through a host of fine 
structures called dendrites. The neuron sends out 
spikes of electrical activity through a long, thin 
stand known as an axon, which splits into 
thousands of branches. At the end of each branch, a 
structure called a synapse converts the activity 
from the axon into electrical effects that inhibit or 
excite activity from the axon into electrical effects 
that inhibit or excite activity in the connected 
neurons. When a neuron receives excitatory input 
that is sufficiently large  compared with its 
inhibitory input, it sends a spike of electrical 
activity down its axon. 
Fig 6: Synapse
Learning occurs by changing the effectiveness of 
the synapses so that the influence of one neuron on 
another changes.
6.3 From Human Neurons to Artificial 
Neurons
  Fig 8: Neuron Structure            
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, 
Vol. 7, No. 3, March 2010 
299
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

We conduct these neural networks by first 
trying to deduce the essential features of neurons 
and their interconnections.
7. Components of Artificial Neural 
Analyzer
7.1 A simple neuron
              
                   Fig 8: Simple Neuron
An artificial neuron is a device with many inputs 
and one output. The neuron has two modes of 
operation; the training mode and the using mode. In 
the training mode, the neuron can be trained to fire 
(or not), for particular input patterns.
7.2 A more complicated neuron
The previous neuron doesn't do anything 
that conventional computers don't do already. A 
more sophisticated neuron is the McCulloch and 
Pitts model (MCP). The difference from the 
previous model is that the inputs are ‘weighted’; 
the effect that each input has at decision making is 
Fig 9: Complicated Neuron
dependent on the weight of the particular input. 
The weight of an input is a number which when 
multiplied with the input gives the weighted input. 
In any other case the neuron does not fire. In 
mathematical terms, the neuron fires if and only if; 
X1W1 + X2W2 + X3W3 + ... > T 
The addition of input weights and of the 
threshold makes this neuron a very flexible and 
powerful one. The MCP neuron has the ability to 
adapt to a particular situation by changing its 
weights and/or threshold. Various algorithms exist 
that cause the neuron to 'adapt'; the most used ones 
are the Delta rule and the back error propagation. 
The former is used in feed-forward networks and 
the latter in feedback networks. 
7.3 Feed-forward networks
Feed-forward ANNs allow signals to 
travel one way only; from input to output. There is 
no feedback (loops) i.e. the output of any layer 
does not affect that same layer. Feed-forward 
ANNs tend to be straight forward networks that 
associate inputs with outputs. They are extensively 
used in pattern recognition. 
This type 
of 
organization is also referred to as bottom-up or top-
down. 
Fig 10: General Neural Network
7.3.1 Network layers
The commonest type of artificial neural 
network consists of three groups, or layers, of 
units: a layer of "input" units is connected to a 
layer of "hidden" units, which is connected to a 
layer of "output" units. 

The activity of the input units represents the 
raw information that is fed into the network.

The activity of each hidden unit is determined 
by the activities of the input units and the 
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, 
Vol. 7, No. 3, March 2010 
300
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

weights on the connections between the input 
and the hidden units.

The behavior of the output units depends on 
the activity of the hidden units and the weights 
between the hidden and output units.
This simple type of network is interesting 
because the hidden units are free to construct their 
own representations of the input. The weights 
between the input and hidden units determine when 
each hidden unit is active, and so by modifying 
these weights, a hidden unit can choose what it 
represents.
We also distinguish single-layer and 
multi-layer 
architectures. 
The 
single-layer 
organization, in which all units are connected to 
one another, constitutes the most general case and 
is of more potential computational power than 
hierarchically structured multi-layer organizations. 
7.4 Feedback networks
Feedback networks can have signals 
traveling in both directions by introducing loops in 
the network. Feedback networks are very powerful 
and can get extremely complicated. Feedback 
networks are dynamic; their 'state' is changing 
continuously until they reach an equilibrium point. 
7.5 Back-propagation Algorithm - a 
mathematical approach
Units are connected to one another. 
Connections correspond to the edges of the 
underlying directed graph. There is a real number 
associated with each connection, which is called 
the weight of the connection. We denote by Wij the 
weight of the connection from unit ui to unit uj. It 
is then convenient to represent the pattern of
connectivity in the network by a weight matrix W 
whose elements are the weights Wij. Two types of 
connection are usually distinguished: excitatory 
and inhibitory. A positive weight represents an 
excitatory connection whereas a negative weight 
represents an inhibitory connection
Fig 11:   Back Propagation Neural Network
A unit in the output layer determines its activity by 
following a two step procedure. 
First, it computes the total weighted input xj, 
using the formula: 
Where yi is the activity level of the jth unit in the 
previous layer and Wij is the weight of the 
connection between the ith and the jth unit.
Next, the unit calculates the activity yj using 
some function of the total weighted input. 
Typically we use the sigmoid function:
Once the activities of all output units have been 
determined, the network computes the error E, 
which is defined by the expression:
Where yj is the activity level of the jth unit in the 
top layer and dj is the desired output of the jth unit.
7.5.1 The back-propagation algorithm 
consists of four steps:
1. Compute how fast the error changes as the 
activity of an output unit is changed. This error 
derivative (EA) is the difference between the actual 
and the desired activity.
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, 
Vol. 7, No. 3, March 2010 
301
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

2. Compute how fast the error changes as the total 
input received by an output unit is changed. This 
quantity (EI) is the answer from step 1 multiplied 
by the rate at which the output of a unit changes as 
its total input is changed.
3. Compute how fast the error changes as a weight 
on the connection into an output unit is changed. 
This quantity (EW) is the answer from step 2 
multiplied by the activity level of the unit from 
which the connection emanates.
4. Compute how fast the error changes as the 
activity of a unit in the previous layer is changed. It 
is the answer in step 2 multiplied by the weight on 
the connection to that output unit.
By using steps 2 and 4, we can convert the EAs of 
one layer of units into EAs for the previous layer. 
This procedure can be repeated to get the EAs for 
as many previous layers as desired. Once we know 
the EA of a unit, we can use steps 2 and 3 to 
compute the EWs on its incoming connections.
8. Features of Artificial Neural Analyzer
Depending on the nature of the application 
and the strength of the internal data patterns you 
can generally expect a network to train quite well. 
This applies to problems where the relationships 
may be quite dynamic or non-linear. ANNs provide 
an analytical alternative to conventional techniques 
which are often limited by strict assumptions of 
normality, linearity, variable independence etc. 
Some of the major advantages of Artificial Neural 
Analyzer are:
There is no need to assume an underlying data 
distribution such as usually is done in statistical 
modeling. 
Neural networks are applicable to multivariate 
non-linear problems.
The transformations of the variables are 
automated in the computational process
9. 
Components 
of 
Probabilistic 
Semantic Web Mining
This paper proposes the idea of combining 
the efficient methods those can make efficient for 
the web mining. For obtaining this effect, search 
engine should mainly contain three components: 

Semantic Web Miner,         

Artificial Neural Analyzer, &

Result Formatter.                
9.1 Semantic Web Miner
As we have already seen about working of 
general semantic web mining module. This 
semantic web miner will include: Syntactic Parser, 
Semantic Analyzer and Semantic Result Generator. 
This miner performs first level of web results 
analysis.
9.1.1 Syntactic Parser: it is simple parser that 
reads the given input string, and converts to 
corresponding syntax tree.  This syntax tree can be 
used for calculating the syntactic matched results. 
Large collection of web results will obtain with this 
simple syntactic parser. Most of these results may 
not useful, so it will be sending for semantic 
analysis.
9.1.2 Semantic Analyzer: this analyzer will 
verify the semantic details of each and every result 
obtained in the syntactic parser. This analyzer will 
verify the semantics by contacting the web server 
Meta information details of the web resources.
9.1.3 Semantic Result Generator: this 
component is useful for finalizing the semantically 
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, 
Vol. 7, No. 3, March 2010 
302
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

matched web result from the list of syntactically 
matched web results. Even though these results 
may contains some of the un wanted results in 
miner levels. 
9.2 Artificial Neural Analyzer (ANA):
This will be the second level of web 
analysis. 
This 
analyzer 
contains 
various 
components required for producing Artificial 
Neural Network effect. Along with that artificial
neural network, it also included with Probabilities 
attacher. This probabilities attacher will add 
probability labels for each and every semantic 
result that are obtained from the ANA..
9.3 Result Formatter:
This formatter contains various methods 
of representing the output result. Since probabilities 
play major role in these analyses, it must sort out 
the web results according to its probabilities order. 
Those sorting algorithms must be included in this 
formatter at the same time it must also include 
probability cut off analysis in order to restrict the 
low probability web results.
Fig 12:
Probabilistic Semantic Web Miner with 
Artificial Neural Analysis Architecture
When if a web user requested to search a string 
“semantic web mining”, then syntactic analyzer 
will construct syntax tree with three leaf nodes 
labeled ”semantic”,  “web”, and “mining”. Then 
search for the matching on the web server. 
10. Conclusion
The idea proposed in this paper can give 
powerful architecture for the search engines in web 
mining. Semantic web miner used in this 
architecture will help in reducing the time required 
for searching results. Probabilities attached to the 
semantic results can be used to reduce number or 
count of un wanted result.  With this combined 
techniques will give more accurate results of web 
resources with in less time. This paper idea that 
attached to search engines will produce only 
relevant information in order to reduce burden of 
un wanted results for the web user request to same 
their valuable search time.
11. References
[1] B. Berendt. Using site semantics to analyze, 
visualize and support navigation. Data Mining and 
Knowledge Discovery, 6:37–59, 2002.
]2] B. Berendt and M. Spiliopoulou. Analysing 
navigation behaviour in web sites integrating 
multiple information systems. The VLDB Journal, 
9(1):56–75, 2000.
[3] S. Chakrabarti. Data mining for hypertext: 
Atutorial survey. SIGKDD Explorations, 1:1–11, 
2000.
[4] S. Chakrabarti, B. Dom, D. Gibson, J. 
Kleinberg, P. Raghavan, and S. Rajagopalan. 
[5] S. Chakrabarti, M. van den Berg, and B. Dom. 
[6] Hans Chalupsky. Ontomorph: Atranslation 
system for symbolic knowledge. 
[7] G. Chang, M.J. Healey, J.A.M. McHugh, and 
J.T.L.Wang. Mining the World Wide Web. An 
Information Search Approach. 
[8] E.H. Chi, P. Pirolli, and J. Pitkow. The scent of 
a site: a system for analyzing and predicting 
information scent, usage, and usability of a web 
site.  
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, 
Vol. 7, No. 3, March 2010 
303
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

AUTHORS
1. T. KRISHNA KISHORE,  working as an Asst. 
Professor, 
Dept. 
of 
CSE, 
in 
ST. 
ANN’S  
COLLEGE 
OF 
ENGINEERING 
& 
TECHNOLOGY,CHIRALA-523187,PRAKASAM
(DT.), ANDHRA PRADESH, INDIA. 
           His
Interested Areas are COMPUTER 
NETWORKS, 
INFORMATION 
SECURITY, 
THEORY OF COMPUTATION, COMPILER 
DESIGN, EMBEDDED SYSTEMS…..
Mobile: + 91 – 9885406051

2. T. SASI VARDHAN, working as an Asst. 
Professor, 
Dept. 
of 
IT, 
in 
ST. 
ANN’S  
ENGINEERING 
COLLEGE, 
CHIRALA-
523187,PRAKASAM 
(DT.), 
ANDHRA 
PRADESH, INDIA. 
           His Interested Areas are COMPUTER 
NETWORKS, 
INFORMATION 
SECURITY, 
DATA 
MINING 
& 
WAREHOUSING, 
and 
SOFTWARE ENGINEERING…..
    Mobile: +91 – 9959859922

3. N. LAKSHMI NARAYANA, working as an 
Asst. Professor, Dept. of CSE, in ST. ANN’S  
COLLEGE 
OF 
ENGINEERING 
& 
TECHNOLOGY,CHIRALA-523187,PRAKASAM 
(DT.), ANDHRA PRADESH, INDIA. 
           His Interested Areas are COMPUTER 
NETWORKS, WEB DESIGNING, COMPILER 
DESIGN, TESTING METHODOLOGIES…..
Mobile: +91 – 9030136208

(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, 
Vol. 7, No. 3, March 2010 
304
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500
