Introducing  Dendritic Cells as  a Novel 
Immune-Inspired  Algorithm for  Anomaly 
Detection 
 
 
Julie Greensmith1 , Uwe Aickelin1 , and Steve Cayzer2 
 
1     ASAP,  School of Computer Science and  IT,  University of Nottingham, Jubilee  
Campus, Wollaton Road,  Nottingham, UK, NG8 1BB. 

2     Hewlett-Packard Labs  plc, Filton Road,  Stoke Gifford,  Bristol, UK. BS32 0QZ . 

 
 
 
Abstract.  Dendritic cells  are  antigen presenting cells  that  provide  a 
vital  link  between  the  innate   and  adaptive immune  system.   Research 
into  this  family  of cells has  revealed  that  they perform  the role  of co- 
ordinating T-cell  based  immune responses,  both  reactive  and  for gener- 
ating  tolerance. We have derived an algorithm based on the functionality 
of these  cells, and have used the  signals and  differentiation pathways to 
build  a  control  mechanism for an  artificial  immune  system.  We  present 
our algorithmic details  in addition to some preliminary results, where the 
algorithm  was  applied  for the  purpose  of anomaly  detection.  We  hope 
that this  algorithm  will eventually become the key component within  a 
large,  distributed immune  system,  based  on sound  immunological  con- 
cepts. 
 
 
Keywords -  artificial   immune   systems,  dendritic cells,  anomaly  detection,  Danger 
Theory 
 
 
1 Introduction 
 
In 2003, Aickelin et al outlined  a project  describing  the application of a novel 
immunological theory,  the Danger Theory  to intrusion  detection  systems[1]. The 
authors of this work suggested that the Danger Theory  encompassed  pathogenic 
detection, where  the basis  for discrimination was not  centred  around  ‘self ’  or 
‘non-self ’, but  to the presence or absence of danger signals. The paper described 
how danger  signals are released  from the  body’s own tissue  cells as a result  of 
necrotic  cell death,  triggered by an invading pathogen. The immune system was 
thought to be sensitive to changes in concentration of danger signals and hence an 
appropriate response is generated.  Aickelin et al propose that by differentiating 
between the chaotic  process of necrotic  cell death  and  the  safe signals derived 
from regulated  apoptotic  cell death,  pathogenic  agents  can be detected  within 
an artificial  immune system  context. 

 
 
 
 
Currently, the  majority of artificial  immune  systems  (AIS)  encompass  two 
different types of immune inspired algorithms,  namely negative  selection (T-cell 
based),  and  clonal selection  with  somatic  hypermutation(B-cell based).  Excep- 
tions  to  this  include [16], where defined patterns of misbehaviour  was used to 
create  danger  signals  within  mobile  ad-hoc  networks.  Danger  signals  are  used 
in [2] to  define the  context  for collaborative  filtering.  Implementations  includ- 
ing Danger  Theory  so far, have monitored danger  signals directly  and have not 
taken into account any of the cells responsible for signal detection.  It is thought 
that danger  signals  are  detected  and  processed  through ‘professional’ antigen 
presenting  cells known as dendritic  cells. Dendritic  cells are viewed as one of 
the  major  control mechanisms  of the  immune  system,  influencing  and  orches- 
trating T-cell responses,  in addition to  acting  as a vital  interface  between the 
innate  (initial  detection) and adaptive (effector response)  immune systems. 
 
 
 
Dendritic  cells (DCs)  are  responsible  for some of the  initial  pathogenic  re- 
cognition  process,  sampling  the  environment  and  differentiating depending  on 
the concentration of signals, or perceived misbehaviour,  in the host tissue cells. 
Strong  parallels  can be drawn from this process to the goal of successful anom- 
aly  detection.  Current  anomaly  detection systems  frequently  rely  on profiling 
‘normal’ user behaviour  during  a training  period.  Any subsequent observed be- 
haviour that does not match the normal profile (often based on a simple distance 
metric) is classed as anomalous.  At this  point an ‘alert’ is generated. However, 
these systems can have problems  with high levels of false positive errors,  as be- 
haviour  of users on a system  changes over a period of time.  Anomaly  detection 
systems  remain  a high  research  priority  as their  inherent  properties  allow for 
the  detection  of novel instances,  which could not  be detected using a signature 
based approach. AIS featuring  negative selection algorithms  have been tried and 
tested  for the purpose of anomaly detection [6]. They produced promising results, 
but were tarnished by issues surrounding false positives and scalability[8]. Some 
moderately successful non-AIS systems  have been implemented, often involving 
adaptive  sampling[4] and adaptive  alert threshold  modification. 
 
 
 
The aim of this research is to understand the Danger Theory  and its implic- 
ations  and to be able to derive an anomaly  detection  system. More specifically, 
section  2 of this  paper  explores  the  process of cell death  and  the  debate  sur- 
rounding  immune  activating signals.  Section 3 focuses on dendritic  cells with 
respect to changing  morphologies,  functions, control of the immune system  and 
in terms  of the  infectious  non-self and  danger  theories.  Section  4 outlines  an 
abstraction from DC functioning  and  the  derivation of a bio-inspired  anomaly 
detection  unit.  Section  5 shows a worked example  of how a DC algorithm  can 
be used as a signal processor,  complete  with  pseudo-code  and  preliminary res- 
ults.  Section 6 includes a brief analysis  of the results  and details  of future  work 
followed by conclusions. 

 
 
 
 
2 Death, Danger and Pathogenic Products 
 
2.1  Cell Death & Tissues 
 
Our  organs  are made  up of a collection of specialised cells - generically  named 
tissues.  Tissue  cells communicate with  each other  through the  use of secreted 
messenger chemicals known as cytokines. These cytokines can have different ef- 
fects on the tissue cells in the vicinity and can be either pro or anti-inflammatory 
in nature. The  tissue  coupled  with  the surrounding fluid containing  cytokines 
forms the  environment for the  DC.  The  cytokine  profile of the  tissue changes 
according  to differences in the type of cell death  occurring  in the  tissue at  the 
time,  and can be used to assess the state of the tissue. 
Pre-programmed cell death,  apoptosis is a vital  part  of the  life cycle of a 
cell. Without it, we would not be able to control the growth of our bodies, and we 
would be subject to out of control tumours. On the initiation of apoptosis all nuc- 
lear material  is fragmented in an orderly manner,  digestive enzymes are secreted 
internally  and  new molecules are expressed  on the  surface  of the  cell. The  cell 
is ingested  by macrophages, with  the  membrane still intact. It  is thought  that 
the resulting  cytokines  released from apoptotic cells have an anti-inflammatory 
effect. However, apoptosis  is not the only means by which cells can die. If a cell 
is subject to stress (by means of irradiation, shock, hypoxia or pathogenic  infec- 
tion), it undergoes the process of necrosis. Due to its unplanned nature, there is 
no careful repackaging  of internal cell contents, or preservation of the membrane. 
The cell swells up, loses membrane integrity  and explodes, releasing its contents 
into the  interstitial fluid surrounding neighbouring  tissue  cells inclusive of uric 
acid crystals  and heat  shock proteins.  This type of cytokine  environment is said 
to be pro-inflammatory. This  also includes host derived  antigens  and  all other 
polypeptides  which can be phagocytosed  by a DC. 
The  differences in the  cytokine  profile as a result  of cell death  are  integral 
for understanding the  way in which pathogens  and  other  harmful  activities  are 
sensed by the  immune  system.  There  have been a number  of theories  over the 
last  century  which  have  attempted to  explain  the  phenomena   of pathogenic 
recognition.  Two of the  most  hotly  debated theories - the  Infectious  Non-self 
Model and the Danger Theory are relevant to understanding DCs and imperative 
to the abstraction of a useful algorithm. 
 
 
2.2  Infectious Non-self - The World According to Janeway 
 
Since 1959 the central tenet  of immunology  revolved  around  the  specificity of 
lymphocytes  to antigen. According to this theory, proteins  belonging to the body 
(self ) are  not  recognised  by the  immune  system  due to the  deletion  of self re- 
active T-cells in the thymus.  However, this theory  did not fit with an amassing 
volume of evidence. A new perspective  emerged in 1989 with Janeway’s  insight- 
ful article  [7], which  provided  an  explanation as  to  why  adjuvants added  to 
vaccines were necessary  in order  to stimulate  an immune response.  These ideas 
formed  the  basis  for the infectious  non-self model. This  model,  also known  as 

 
 
 
 
the  detection  of microbial  non-self, is an augmentation of the  long established 
self non-self principles,  though  the  focus is on innate  immune  function[5]. This 
theory  proposes  that the  detection  of pathogens  is done  through the  recogni- 
tion  of conserved  molecules known  as PAMPs  (pathogen associated  molecular 
patterns), essentially exogenous signals. PAMPs  are  produced  by all micro- 
organisms  irrespective  of their pathogenicity, and  can be recognised  by human 
immune system cells through the use of pattern recognition  receptor  e.g. toll-like 
receptors[13].  The  effects of PAMPs  on DCs will be explored  in more detail in 
the coming section. 
 
 
2.3  The Danger Theory - The World According to Matzinger 
 
The  Danger  Theory,  proposed  by Polly  Matzinger  in 1994[10], also emphasises 
the  crucial  role of the  innate  immune  system  for guiding  the adaptive immune 
responses. However, unlike detecting  exogenous signals, the Danger Theory  rests 
on the  detection  of endogenous signals. Endogenous  danger  signals arise  as 
a  result  of damage  or  stress  to  the tissue  cells themselves.  The  crucial  point 
of the  Danger  Theory  is that the  only  pathogens   detected are  the  ones  that 
induce  necrosis  and  cause  actual  damage  to  the  host  tissue.  The  damage  can 
be  caused  by  invading  micro-organisms   or  through defects  in  the host  tissue 
or innate  immune  cells. Irrespective  of the  cause,  the danger  signals  released 
are always the  same. These signals are thought to be derived  from the  internal 
contents  of the  cell[11] inclusive of heat  shock proteins,  fragmented  DNA and 
uric acid. It is proposed  that the exposure  of antigen  presenting  cells to danger 
signals modulates  the cells’ behaviour,  ultimately leading  to  the  activation of 
naive  T-cells  in the  lymph  nodes.  Alternatively, the  absence  of danger  signals 
and the presence of cytokines released as a result of apoptosis can lead to antigen 
presentation in a different context,  deleting  or anergising  a matching  T-cell[12]. 
The Danger Theory suggests that the tissue is in control of the immune response. 
In [14] it is suggested  that DCs have the capability  to combine signals from 
both  endogenous  and  exogenous  sources,  and  respond  appropriately. Different 
combinations  of input  signals can ultimately lead to the  differentiation and  ac- 
tivation  of T-cells. Both  theories have implications  for the function  of DCs. 
 
 
3 Introducing Dendritic Cells 
 
Dendritic  cells (DCs)  are  white  blood  cells, which  have  the capability  to  act 
in two different roles - as macrophages  in peripheral tissues and  organs  and  as 
a vehicle for antigen  presentation within  the  secondary  lymphoid  organs.  DCs 
can  be  sub-categorised dependent on  their location  within  the  body.  For  the 
purpose  of this  investigation and  the  subsequent algorithm,  dermal  or  tissue 
resident DCs  have  been  examined.  Essentially,  the DCs’ function  is to  collect 
antigen from pathogens  and host cells in tissues, and to present multiple  antigen 
samples  to naive T-cells in the  lymph  node. DCs exist in a number  of different 
states  of maturity, dependent  on the type  of environmental signals  present  in 

 
 
 
 
the  surrounding fluid.  They  can  exist  in either  immature,  semi-mature  or 
mature forms. The various different phenotypes  of DC are shown in Figure 1. 
 
Immature DC 
‘Semi-mature’ DC 
Mature DC 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Three differentiation states of DCs as shown from the ESEM photographs 
shown (see acknowledgements). 
 
 
 
3.1  Immature DCs 
 
Immature DCs  (iDCs)  are  cells found  in their  initial  maturation state. They 
reside in the tissue where their  primary  function  is to collect and remove debris 
from the interstitial fluid. The ingested material is then  processed by the cell. It 
is either  metabolised  for use by the  cell, returned to the  environment, or is re- 
packaged  for presentation to another immune cell. At this point the matter can 
be termed  antigen,  and could be a ’self ’ molecule or something foreign. The re- 
presentation of antigenic  material  is performed  by complexing the antigen  with 
another molecule namely the MHC molecule family, necessary for binding to T- 
cell receptors.  In order to present antigen to T-cells, DC needs sufficient antigen 
presented  with  MHC.  However,  the  expression  of inflammatory cytokines  are 
needed  in order  to  activate  T-cells.  Therefore  a T-cell encounter  with  an  iDC 
results  in the  deactivation of the  the  T-cell.  Differentiation of iDCs  occurs  in 
response to the receipt of various signals. This leads to full or partial maturation 
depending  on the combination of signals received. 
 
 
3.2  Mature DCs 
 
Due to the low levels of inflammatory cytokines expressed by iDCs, they are not 
able to activate  T-cells on contact. In order  to present antigen  and activate  T- 
cells, the  increased expression  (or up-regulation) of a number  of proteins  and 
cytokines  is necessary.  DCs which have the  ability  to activate  naive T-cells are 
termed mature DCs (mDCs). For an iDC to differentiate and become a mDC, the 
iDC has to be exposed to a certain  number  of signals. This  includes activation 
of toll-like receptors  through exposure  to  both  the  exogenous  and  endogenous 
signals (previously  described).  On exposure to various combinations of these sig- 
nals,  the  DC up-regulates a number  of molecules vital  for stimulating a T-cell 
response. Perhaps most importantly,  it up-regulates a number  of costimulatory 

 
 
 
 
molecules,  pro-inflammatory cytokines  (namely  IL-12),  and  migrates  from the 
tissue  to the  local draining  lymph  node. During  this  migration  period,  the  iDC 
changes morphologically  too. Instead  of being compact (optimal  for antigen col- 
lection),  the DC  develops  whispy,  finger-like projections  - characterising it  as 
a mDC,  as seen in Figure  1. The  projections  not  only make it  distinguishable 
from iDCs, but also increase the surface area of the cell, allowing it to present a 
greater  quantity of antigen. 
 
 
3.3  Semi-Mature DCs 
 
During the antigen  collection process, iDCs can experience other  environmental 
conditions.  This can affect the end-stage  differentiation of a DC. These different 
conditions can give rise to semi-matureDCs (smDCs).  The signals responsible for 
producing  smDCs are also generated by the tissue - endogenous signals. During 
the  process  of apoptosis,  a  number  of proteins  are  actively  up-regulated and 
secreted  by the  dying cell. The  release of TNF-α (tumor necrosis factor)  from 
apoptosing  cells is thought to  be one candidate responsible  for creating  semi- 
mature DCs [9]. As a result of exposure to apoptotic cytokines (TNF-α included), 
an iDC also undergoes  migration  to the  lymph  node, and  some maturation as 
shown  in  Figure  1. Costimulatory molecules  are  up-regulated by  a  small  yet 
significant amount and,  after  migration  to the lymph  node, the cell can present 
antigen  to  any  matching   T-cell.  However,  smDCs  do  not  produce  any  great 
amount of pro-inflammatory cytokines,  necessary for promoting  activation of T- 
cells. Instead, smDCs can produce small quantities  of IL-10 (anti-inflammatory 
cytokine),  which acts to suppress  matching  T-cells. 
 
 
3.4  Summary 
 
In brief, DCs can perform a number of functions, related  to their state  of matura- 
tion. Modulation between these states  is facilitated  by the release of endogenous 
and exogenous signals, produced  by pathogens  and the tissue itself. The state  of 
maturity of a DC influences the response by T-cells, either  immunogenic or tol- 
erogenic, to specific presented  antigen.  Immature DCs reside in the tissue where 
they  collect antigenic  material and  are  exposed  to  exogenous  and  endogenous 
signals. Based  on the  combinations of signals,  mature or semi-mature DCs are 
generated. Mature  DCs have an activating effect while semi-mature DCs have a 
suppressive effect. The different cytokine output by the respective cells differ suf- 
ficiently to provide the context  for antigen presentation. In the following section 
this  information is utilised  to  derive  a signal  processor  based  on the  explored 
functionality of the DCs. 
 
 
4 
DC’s  Meet AIS 
 
There are a number of desirable characteristics exhibited  by DCs that we want to 
incorporate into an algorithm.  In order to achieve this,  the essential  properties, 

 
 
 
 
i.e. those  that heavily  influence immune  functions,  have  to be abstracted from 
the  biological information presented. From  this  we produce  an abstract model 
of DC interactions and functions,  with which we build our algorithm. 
 
 
4.1  Abstraction 
 
As shown, the orchestration of an adaptive immune response via DCs has many 
subtleties. Only  the  essential  features  of this  process  are  mapped  in the  first 
instance  as we are interested in building  an anomaly  detector,  not  an accurate 
simulation.  DCs are examined  from a cellular  perspective,  encompassing  beha- 
viour and  differentiation of the  cells and  ignore the interactions on a molecular 
level and direct interactions with other  immune system cells. 
DCs have a number  of different functional  properties  that we want to incor- 
porate into  an  algorithm. Bearing  this  in mind,  we can  abstract a number  of 
useful core properties, listed below and represented graphically  in Figure  2: 
 
–  iDCs  have  the ability  to  differentiate  in two ways,  resulting  in mature or 
semi-mature cells. 
–  Each  iDC can sample  multiple  antigens  within  the  cell, leading to general- 
isation  of the antigen  context. 
–  The collection of antigen by iDCs is not enough to cause maturity. Exposure 
to certain  signals causes the up-regulation of various molecules that initiate 
antigen  presentation. 
–  Both  smDCs  and  mDCs show expression  of costimulatory molecules, infer- 
ring that both  types have antigen  presenting  capabilities. 
–  The cytokines output by mature and semi-mature cells are different, provid- 
ing contextual  information. The  concentration of the  output cytokines  is 
dependent  on the  input signals  and  can  be viewed as an  interpretation  of 
the original signal strength. 
 
The effects of individual  cytokines and antigen binding affinities have not yet 
been incorporated into this model, as the initial implementation does not feature 
T-cells. As stated in [14], we are treating  DCs as processors of both  exogenous 
and endogenous signal processors. Input signals are categorised  either as PAMPs 
(P),  Safe Signals (S), Danger  Signals (D)  or Inflammatory Cytokines  (IC)  and 
represent a concentration of signal. They  are transformed to output concentra- 
tions of costimulatory molecules (csm), smDC cytokines  (semi) and mDC (mat) 
cytokines.  The  signal processing  function  described  in Equation 1 is used with 
the  empirically  derived  weightings  presented  in Table  1. These  weightings  are 
based  on unpublished biological information (see acknowledgements) and  rep- 
resent the  ratio  of activated DCs  in the  presence  and  absence  of the  various 
stimuli  e.g. approximately double  the  number  of DCs mature on contact with 
PAMPs  as opposed to Danger Signals. Additionally, Safe Signals may reduce the 
action  of PAMPS  by the same order of magnitude. Inflammatory cytokines  are 
not sufficient to initiate maturation or presentation but can have an amplifying 
effect on the other  signals present. This function  is used to combine each of the 

WP +WS +WD  
∗2 (1) 
 
 
 
 
 
Semi-mature 
 
 
 
Immature 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-collect antigen 
-receive signals 
-in tissue 
 
 
Safe Signals 
 
 
 
 
Danger Signals 
PAMPS 
Inflammatory CKs 
 
 
-present antigen 
-produce  costimulation 
-provide tolerance cytokines 
-in lymph node 
 
Mature 
 
 
 
-present antigen 
-produce  costimulation 
-provide reactive cytokines 
-in lymph node 
 
 
Fig. 2. The iDC, smDC and mDC behaviours  and signals required  for differen- 
tiation. CKs denote  cytokines. 
 
 
input signals to derive values for each of the three  output concentrations, where 
Cx  is the input concentration and Wx  is the weight. 
 
 
C[csm,semi,mat]  = (WP ∗CP )+(WS ∗CS )+(WD ∗CD )∗(1+I C ) 
 
 
Table 1. Suggested weighting values for the signal processing function  based on 
DC maturation ratios 
 
W
csm semi mat
PAMPs(P)
2
0
2
Danger Signals(D)
1
0
1
Safe Signals (S)
2
3
-3
 
In  order  to  use  this  model,  input  signals  have  to  be  pre-classified  (either 
manually  or from a signature based intrusion detection  system, another anomaly 
detector,  or ‘artificial’ tissue)  based on the following schema: 
 
PAMPs - signals that are known to be pathogenic 
Safe  Signals - signals that are known to be normal 
Danger Signals - signals that may indicate  changes in behaviour 
Inflammatory  Cytokines - signals that amplify the effects of the other 
signals 

 
 
 
 
In nature, DCs sample  multiple  antigens  within  the  same section  of tissue. To 
mirror this, we create a population of DCs to collectively form a pool from which 
a number  of DCs are selected for the  sampling  process, in a similar  manner  to 
[17]. An aggregate  sampling  method  should reduce the amount of false positives 
generated, providing an element of robustness. For such a system to work, a DC 
can only collect a finite amount of antigen. Hence, an antigen collection threshold 
must  be incorporated so a DC stops  collecting  antigen  and  migrates  from the 
sampling pool to a virtual lymph node. In order to achieve this we will use a fuzzy 
threshold, derived in proportion to the concentration of costimulatory molecules 
expressed.  In order to add a stochastic  element,  this threshold is within a range 
of values, so the  exact  number  of antigens  sampled  per DC varies  in line with 
the biological system. 
On migration  to the virtual  lymph  node, the  antigens  contained  within  an 
individual  DC are presented  with the DC’s maturation status. If the concentra- 
tion of mature cytokines  is greater  than  the semi-mature cytokines,  the antigen 
is presented in a ‘mature’  context.  It  is possible to count how many  times an 
antigen had been presented  in either  context  to determine  if the antigen is clas- 
sified as anomalous.  In order to crystallise these concepts,  a worked example and 
details  of a basic implementation are given in the next section. 
 
 
5 Implementing A  DC  Based Algorithm 
 
To  illustrate the  signal  processing  capabilities  of a DC  we have  designed  and 
implemented a simple prototype system. The purpose of this implementation is 
to demonstrate the signal processing capability of a population of DCs and their 
ability  to choose between the mature and semi-mature pathways.  We expect to 
see differentiation pathway  switching when the data  items change from one class 
to another. In essence a DC algorithm should transform a representation of input 
data  items  and  signals into the  form of antigen-plus-context. From this  we can 
then  derive information based on the analysis  of the output cytokines. 
For  such an algorithm to work, some data  attributes have  to be classed as 
signals.  We use the  standard UCI  Wisconsin  Breast Cancer  data-set[15], con- 
taining  700 items, each with nine normalised  attributes representing the various 
characteristics of a potentially cancerous  cell. Each  data  item  also has a tenth 
attribute, which is a classification  label of class 1 or class 2. Although  this  is a 
static  dataset, it is suitable  for use with our algorithm  as data  is used in an event 
driven manner.  In order to reduce the difficulty of interpreting the inital  experi- 
ments  only a subset  of the data  was used. Data  items with the largest standard 
deviation  form the  danger  signals, namely  cell size, cell shape, bare  nuclei and 
normal  nucleoli. For  each of these  attributes the  mean  was calculated over all 
data  items in class 1. Subsequently,  the  absolute  difference from the  mean  was 
calculated for each data  item,  within  each attribute, v. The average of the four 
attribute mean differences comprises the derived danger  signal concentration. 
To generate  concentrations for safe signals and  PAMPs,  the  clump  size at- 
tribute was chosen as it had  the  next  greatest standard deviation.  The  median 

2+2+1  
(2)
 
 
 
 
clump size value for all the data  items was calculated and each item is compared 
to  the  median.  If the  attribute value  is greater  than the median,  safe signals 
are derived, equalling the absolute  difference between the median and the clump 
size, and  the  PAMP  concentration is set  to  zero. If the value  is less than  the 
median,  then  the reverse is true, i.e. safe signals are set to zero and PAMPs  are 
equal to the  absolute  distance.  A worked example  is presented in Tables  2 and 
3, using one data  item and the weightings  from Table  1. An example  of how to 
transform the input  signals into csms is presented in Equation 2, using a modi- 
fied version of Equation 1. This example  data  item was taken from class 1 and, 
as expected,  produces  a higher concentration of smDC than  mDC cytokines. 
Table 2. Sample data  item with calculated  threshold and signal values ( in bold) 
 
Sample Data  Attribute
Data Value Mean/Threshold Derived Signal 
Clump  Size 
10
4
6 
Cell Size 
Cell Shape Bare 
Nuclei Normal 
Nucleoli 
8
8 
4 
7 
6.59
6.56 
7.62 
5.88 
1.41 
1.44 
3.62 
1.12 
Mean Danger  Signal 
-
-
1.8975 
 
Ccsm  =  (2∗0)+(2∗6)+(1∗1.8975) 
 
Table 3. The output of the signal processing calculations 
 
Output Signal Output Conc.
csm
semi 
mat 
2.7795
6 
-16.1025 
 
Although  we incorporate inflammatory cytokines into the model, they are not 
used in this example, as no obvious mapping  is available.  Antigen is represented 
in its simplest form, as the identification number of a data  item within the data- 
set. The antigen  label facilitates  the tracking of data  items through the system. 
Once the  signals have been derived  and  associated  with  an antigen  label, they 
are  processed  by  the  population of DCs.  All featured  parameters are  derived 
from empirical immunological data.  In our experiments, 100 DCs are created  for 
the  pool and  ten  are  selected  at  random  to  sample  each  antigen.  The  signals 
relating  to the antigen  are processed by each selected DC and the total  amount 
of output cytokines  expressed  are  measured.  The  fuzzy migration  threshold is 
set  to ten.  Once this  has been exceeded,  a particular DC is removed  from the 
pool and replaced by a new one. After all antigen has been sampled,  the context 
of each antigen  is determined based  on the  number  of times it was sampled  as 
either  mature or semi-mature. The  threshold for classification  is derived  from 
the distribution of the data. 
The algorithmic  details are presented  in the pseudo-code as shown in Figure 
3: 

 
 
 
 
 
create DC pool of 100 cells 
 
for   each data item 
pick 10 DCs from pool 
for each DC 
add antigen(DataLabel) to antigenCollected list 
update input signal concentrations 
calculate concentrations for  output cytokines 
update running total of each output cytokine 
if total csms > fuzzy threshold 
removeDC from pool and migrate 
create new DC 
 
for   each DC that migrates 
if  concentration of semi  > 
mature antigenContext = semi 
else 
antigenContext = mature 
 
for   each antigen that entered the system 
calculate  number of times presented as mature or 
semi if semi > mature 
antigen = 
benign else 
antigen = malignant 
 
 
Fig. 3. Pseudocode  for our simple example of a DC algorithm 
 
 
5.1  Experiments and Preliminary  Results 
 
Two experiments are performed using the standard Breast Cancer machine learn- 
ing data-set. This data  is divided into class 1 (240 items) and class 2 (460 items). 
The order of the data  items is varied for the two experiments.  Experiment 1 uses 
data  on a class by class basis i.e. all of class 1 followed by all of class 2. Exper- 
iment  2 uses 120 data  items from class 1, all 460 items  of class 2 followed by 
the  remaining  120 items  from  class  1. Each  experiment  is run  20 times  on a 
Mac iBook G4 1.2MHz, with  code implemented in C++(using g++ 3.3). Each 
run samples each data  item 10 times, giving 7000 antigen presentations per run, 
with 20 runs performed  per experiment. The time taken to perform  100 runs is 
under  60 seconds, giving approximately 10,000 data  items  sampled  per second. 
The threshold for classification  is set to  0.65 to  reflect  the  weighting - items 
exceeding the threshold are classed as class 2, with lower valued antigen labelled 
as class 1. These  classifications  are  compared  with  the labels presented  in the 
original data-set so false positive rates  can be measured,  in addition  to observa- 
tions of the algorithm’s  behaviour. Preliminary results  are presented  in Table  4, 
and graphically  in Figure 4. 
 
Table 4. Table  of results  to compare  two different data  orders 
 
Experiment Actual Class Predicted Class 1 Predicted Class 2 
 
Experiment 1 
Class 1
Class 2 
236
0 
4
460 
 
Experiment 2 
Class 1
Class 2 
234
1 
6
459 

Mean Classification 
Mean Classification 
 
Experiment 1 
Experiment 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Class 1 
Class 2 
 
 
Fig. 4. This figure shows the classification of the 700 items. The bar underneath 
represents the  ordering  of the  data.  The  results  for the  two different data  dis- 
tributions are  presented. The  y-axis  represents  the degree of maturity, from 0 
(semi-mature, class1) to 1 (mature, class 2) . Data  points  above the  threshold 
of 0.65 were classified as class 2 and vice-versa. 
6 Discussion and Future  Work 
 
It  is important to note  that we are not  primarily  trying to build  a new classi- 
fication  algorithm. However, the  classification  accuracy  in these  simple experi- 
ments  exceeds 99%. Rather, we are using this benchmark data-set to show how 
our  dendritic  cell model  exhibits  timely  and  accurate behavioural  switches  to 
changes  in  context.  This  is illustrated by  our  experiments,  in  which  the  sys- 
tem rapidly  switches to ‘danger’ mode (Figure  4, Experiment 1) and back again 
(Figure  4, Experiment 2). Closer examination shows that the  misclassifications 
occur exclusively at the transition boundaries. This is because each DC gathers 
multiple antigens over a period of time. If an iDC differentiates to an mDC, then 
every antigen contained  in that DC is perceived as dangerous  (class 2). Similarly, 
antigens  within  an smDC are all perceived as safe (class 1). It is not surprising 
that during  a transition phase  there  is a small  degree  of confusion  regarding 
temporally  and  spatially  clustered  antigens.  A corollary  to this  is that the  DC 
model is expected  to make more mistakes  if the context  changes multiple  times 
in quick  succession; preliminary experiments  (results  not  shown)  confirm this. 
It is important to stress that the data  set used was not the ideal application for 
this algorithm,  but  it provides data  which we can interpret easily to observe the 
behaviour  of the prototype itself. 
The  implementation of a DC algorithm  that we present utilises  a relatively 
simple, well understood data-set. This was useful as it demonstrated the signal 
processing  and  change  detection  potential of a DC based  algorithm. However, 
as stated in the introduction, the ultimate use for this system  is as an anomaly 
detection  system  with  potential applications in computer  security.  This  could 

attachment, rate  of sending  and  content  of the  mail  message  could  comprise 
the  various  signals, with a representation for the content of an attachment and 
the structure of the message could be an ‘antigen’. Alternatively, the algorithm 

 
 
 
 
could be used to monitor  network  behaviour.  Various  attributes e.g. bandwidth 
consumption, could be mapped  as danger  signals, with safe signals and PAMPs 
derived from the output of various signature matching  components  e.g. an anti- 
virus scanner.  Antigen could be represented by data  flowing through the system 
in terms of specific patterns of process execution, or perhaps  the network packets 
themselves. 
In addition  to  a more  suitable  data-set, a number  of modifications  can  be 
made to the algorithm  itself. For instance,  we did not include any inflammatory 
cytokines in our worked example due to data  constraints. It would be interesting 
to explore their  proposed amplifying  effects on the other  signals and on the be- 
haviour across a population of DCs. The current weighting function  is simplistic 
and the weights are empirically  derived. Perhaps replacing it with a more soph- 
isticated  signal  processor  based  on multi-sensor  data  fusion  techniques  would 
be worth  exploring.  It will be interesting  to  see if making  the  algorithm more 
biologically plausible  results  in improved,  finer grained  detection. Potential im- 
provements could include using a network of cytokines, specifically the cytokines 
responsible  for T-cell activation and  proliferation (e.g. IL-12, IL-10, IL-2), and 
dynamics taken from the accumulating body of immunological experimental res- 
ults.  DCs  are  only  one component  of the  immune  system  - the incorporation 
of other  ‘cells’ such as tissue  (for endogenous  signals) or T-cells (for an effector 
response) may give an improved performance. 
 
 
7 Conclusions 
 
In  this  paper  we have  presented   a  detailed  description of dendritic cells and 
the  antigen presentation process, from which an algorithm was abstracted. We 
have also presented  a worked example  and  prototype implementation based  on 
this  abstraction The  preliminary results  are  encouraging  as  both  data  orders 
produced  low rates  of false positive  errors. 
It is worth  making  two points about  these results.  Firstly,  it is very encour- 
aging  that our  simple  model  illustrates a prediction  from  the  Danger  Theory 
[10]: “...self-reactive killers should be found during  the  early phases  of most re- 
sponses to foreign antigens, and they  should disappear with time”.  Secondly, it 
must be remembered  that DCs are only part  of a system, and that auto-reactive 
T cells will be tolerised if they subsequently encounter  the same antigen in a safe 
context.  A DC model is expected  to work in partnership with  a T cell system 
within the larger framework of a distributed immune inspired security system[3]. 
 
 
8 Acknowledgements 
 
This project is supported by the EPSRC (GR/S47809/01), Hewlet Packard Labs, 
Bristol,  and the Firestorm intrusion detection system team.  ESEM photographs 
provided  courtesy  of Dr Julie  McLeod,  UWE,  UK.  The  authors would like to 
thank   Dr  Rachel  Harry  and  Charlotte Williams  for  the  additional biological 
information. Thanks  to Jamie  Twycross  for assistance  throughout. Also, many 

 
 
 
 
thanks  to Dr Jungwon  Kim, William Wilson, Markus  Hammonds,  Dr Christian 
Lambert,  Gillan  Cash,  Jim  Greensmith and  the  rest  of the  Danger  Team  for 
their  help, support and useful comments.
