639 
Mixture Approximations to Bayesian Networks 
Volker Tresp, Michael Haft and Reimar Hofmann 
Siemens AG, Corporate Technology 
Neural Computation 
Dept. Information and Communications 
Otto-Hahn-Ring 6, 81730 Munich, Germany 
Abstract 
Structure and parameters in a Bayesian net­
work uniquely specify the probability distri­
bution of the modeled domain. The locality 
of both structure and probabilistic informa­
tion are the great benefits of Bayesian net­
works and require the modeler to only spec­
ify local information. On the other hand 
this locality of information might prevent the 
modeler -and even more any other person­
from obtaining a general overview of the im­
portant relationships within the domain. The 
goal of the work presented in this paper is to 
provide an "alternative" view on the knowl­
edge encoded in a Bayesian network which 
might sometimes be very helpful for pro­
viding insights into the underlying domain. 
The basic idea is to calculate a mixture ap­
proximation to the probability distribution 
represented by the Bayesian network. The 
mixture component densities can be thought 
of as representing typical scenarios implied 
by the Bayesian model, providing intuition 
about the basic relationships. As an addi­
tional benefit, performing inference in the 
approximate model is very simple and intu­
itive and can provide additional insights. The 
computational complexity for the calculation 
of the mixture approximations critically de­
pends on the measure which defines the dis­
tance between the probability distribution 
represented by the Bayesian network and 
the approximate distribution. Both the KL­
divergence and the backward KL-divergence 
lead to inefficient algorithms. Incidentally, 
the latter is used in recent work on mixtures 
of mean field solutions to which the work pre­
sented here is closely related. We show, how­
ever, that using a mean squared error cost 
function leads to update equations which can 
be solved using the junction tree algorithm. 
We conclude that the mean squared error 
cost function can be used for Bayesian net­
works in which inference based on the junc­
tion tree is tractable. For large networks, 
however, one may have to rely on mean field 
approximations. 
1 
Introduction 
One of the appealing aspects of Bayesian networks is 
their modularity; the modeler has to specify only local 
information and may thus generate a complex model 
step by step. As a drawback of local modeling one 
might very soon loose the overview of the relation­
ships in the joint model. The goal of the work pre­
sented in this paper is to provide an "alternative" view 
on the domain knowledge encoded in a Bayesian net­
work which might sometimes be very helpful for pro­
viding insights into the underlying domain. The basic 
idea is to calculate a mixture approximation to the 
probability distribution represented by the Bayesian 
network. The mixture component densities can be 
thought of as representing typical scenarios as com­
ponents of the joint distribution thus providing intu­
ition about the basic relationships in the domain. It 
can be argued that reasoning in terms of cases or sce­
narios is very close to the human approach to deal­
ing with complex domains. This idea was explored 
by Druzdzel and Henrion (1990) who used as sce­
narios the most likely configurations given some ev­
idence (although they didn't provide efficient algo­
rithms for finding those). A mixture of 'scenarios' can 
be computed both for the joint distribution encoded 
by the Bayesian net and for a conditional distribu­
tion given evidence. In the latter case our approach 
can illustrate the relationships in the joint distribution 
of the unknown variables given the evidence which is 
not straightforward in the standard evidence propaga­
tion algorithms which primarily only calculate simple 

640 
Tresp, Haft, and Hofmann 
marginals. The challenge in our approach lies in cal­
culating the optimal parameters in the mixture mod­
els. It turns out that the computational complexity 
for the calculation of the mixture approximations crit­
ically depends on the measure which is used for calcu­
lating the distance between the probability distribu­
tion represented by the Bayesian network and the ap­
proximate distribution. We show that finding the best 
approximation using the most natural metric, i.e. the 
Kullback-Leibler (KL-) distance is computationally in­
feasible. The same is true if the backward KL-distance 
is used. Haft, Hofmann and Tresp (1997, 1999) have 
shown that for the latter case, a reasonable approxima­
tion can be found by first finding the local minima of 
the backward KL-distance between the Bayesian net­
work model and one mixture component (which cor­
responds to solving the mean field equations) and by 
forming the mixture model in a second step by using a 
small overlap assumption. A new approach pursued in 
this paper is to replace the KL-distance as a distance 
measure by the mean squared distance between the 
probability distribution described by the Bayesian net­
work model and the mixture approximation. We can 
show that if either the mean squared distance or the 
expected mean squared distance is used, the resulting 
equations can be solved using the junction tree algo­
rithm (Lauritzen and Spiegelhalter, 1988, Jensen, Lau­
ritzen and Olsen, 1990). The algorithms are therefore 
exactly then efficient, when inference in the Bayesian 
network itself is efficient. The ideas here are devel­
oped for binary Bayesian networks but can easily be 
generalized to general graphical models, discrete mod­
els and Gaussian graphical models. In the next Sec­
tion we develop and discuss the different algorithms for 
obtaining mixture approximations in the joint proba­
bility distribution. In the following Section we show 
how evidence can be taken into account. In Section 4 
we perform a mixture analysis of the well-known chest 
clinic example. We demonstrate how typical scenarios 
can be extracted, how inference can be performed in 
the approximate model and how simple probabilistic 
rules can be extracted. Finally, in Section 5 we present 
conclusions. 
2 
Theory 
Assume a Bayesian network with N variables with 
probability distribution P(x) which factorizes as 
N 
P(x) = II P(xjiiij)· 
j=l 
As stated in the introduction our goal is to find a mix­
ture approximation to P(x) of the form 
M 
M 
P(x)RjQ(x) =LQ(i,x) =Lq;Q(xli). 
(1) 
i=l 
i=l 
For simplicity, we focus in this paper on the case that 
x = (xi, ... , XN )' is a vector of binary variables Xj E 
{0, 1} and that the mixture component distributions 
factorize into binomial distributions 
N 
Q(xli) = II q7J (1- Qij)!-x;. 
(2) 
j=l 
The goal is now to determine the model parameters 
{q;j}t;1;=I and {q;}t;1 such that we obtain a good 
approximation to P(x). First, we need to define a dis­
tance measure which specifies what exactly we mean 
by a "good" approximation. In the next sections we 
will define different distance measures and we will show 
that the complexity of the resulting update equations 
very much depends on the distance measure which is 
selected. 
2.1 
KL-divergence 
The KL-divergence has the form 
KL(P(x)IIQ(x)) = -L P(x) log i:i · 
X 
This cost function might be considered the most nat­
ural cost function since it corresponds to drawing an 
infinite number of samples from P(x) and to then do 
a maximum likelihood mixture modeling approach of 
the data. 
The K £-distance can be minimized using an EM­
algorithm. The E-step calculates Vi and V configu­
rations of x 
and the M-steps update Vi, j 
and Vi 
I:x,x;=! P(x)Q(ilx) 
Qij = 
I:x P(x)Q(ilx) 
I:x P(x)Q(ilx) 
q; = I:x I;& P(x)Q(ilx). 
Since the summations in the update equations are over 
exponentially many states of x and since Q( ilx) can­
not be easily decomposed, the update equations are 
infeasible for large networks. The only exception is if 

Mixture Approximations to Bayesian Networks 
641 
M = 1, since then the M-step reduces to q1j = P(xj) 
and simply calculates the marginal distributions which 
can be calculated efficiently using the junction tree al­
gorithm. 
A simple approximate solution can be obtained by 
generating a large number of samples from a given 
Bayesian network and by then calculating the model 
which maximizes the likelihood w.r.t. the data us­
ing the corresponding EM-algorithm. In this case, the 
sums in the previous EM-equations contain only as 
many terms as data are generated. Although this ap­
proach should be feasible in most cases, if some mix­
ture components only obtain small probabilities, one 
might have to generate a large number of samples to 
obtain good parameter estimates. 
2.2 
The Backward KL-divergence 
There is a clear asymmetry in the KL-distance w.r.t 
the two distributions P(x) and Q(x). It is therefore 
also common to optimize the "backward" KL-distance 
defined as 
BKL(P(x)IIQ(x)) = KL(Q(x)IIP(x)) 
""""' 
P(x) 
=- L.. Q(x) log Q(x)" 
X 
Note that the role of Q(x) and P(x) is interchanged 
and the expectation is calculated with respect to the 
simpler approximate distribution Q(x). For M = 1 
(i.e. only one component), minima of BK L can be 
found by iterating the associated mean field equations 
which for the binary case ( 2) read 
The previous equation is iterated repeatedly for all j 
until convergence where Mj C x denotes the elements 
in the Markov blanket of Xj and 
sig(x) = [1+ exp(-x)t1. 
The previous update equation is efficient since it re­
quires the summation only over the elements in the 
Markov blanket of x j and therefore only involves lo­
cal computations. Haft, Hofmann and Tresp (1999) 
have shown that for Bayesian networks the update 
equations can further be simplified. Note, that -as 
for example in the mean field approximation to the 
Boltzmann machine- the sigmoid transfer function 
is a result of using the mean field approximation and 
was not postulated as in the work on sigmoid belief 
networks (Saul, Jaakkola and Jordan, 1996). 
Although the previous mean field update equations 
can be used to find local optima in the B K L-distance, 
calculating the optimal best mixture approximation­
as for the KL-distance- involves the summation over 
all states of the Bayesian network. Haft, Hofmann and 
Tresp (1999) have therefore suggested to find M local 
optima of the BKL-distance and use those as compo­
nents in the mixture model. The mixture weights can 
then be calculated using a small overlap assumption 
as 
where C normalizes the Qj and Q(xjli) = q7j(1-
Qij )1-xi. Note, that again only local computations are 
required. 
Further approximate solutions have been derived by 
Bishop, Lawrence, Jaakkola and Jordan (1998), and 
Lawrence, Bishop and Jordan (1998) for special graph­
ical models such as Boltzmann machines and sigmoid 
belief networks. 
2.3 
The Mean Squared Error 
Let's consider the squared error cost function 
SE(P(x)IIQ(x)) = L(P(x)- Q(x))2 
X 
M M 
= L P(x)2 + L L L q;qkQ(xli)Q(xlk) 
X 
M 
-2 L L P(x) q;Q(xli). 
i=l 
X 
(3) 
The advantage now is that the cost function is a sim­
ple quadratic expression in the the parameters of the 
approximating mixture distribution (1). The SE cost 
function can be motivated by considering a Taylor ex­
pansion to the KL-distance which yields as a distance 
measure l::x(P(x)- Q(x)j2 / P(x). By taking a closer 
look at Equation 3 we notice that all sums over x have 
the form 
N 
LP(x)A IT fi(xj) 
X 
j:l 
(4) 
where A is an integer and /j is a function of x j only, 
Vj. 
We make the following observation: 
Observation 1 All summations of the form of Equa­
tion 4 can be calculated efficiently using, e.g., the junc­
tion tree algorithm, as long as the distribution P itself 
can be handled efficiently. 

642 
Tresp, Haft, and Hofmann 
To see this it is sufficient to note that the structure 
of the sum ( 4) is still that of the original Bayesian 
network and therefore can be factorized the same way. 
To be explicit, 
N 
N 
LP(x)A ITfi(xi) =LIT P(xiiiii)A/j(xi)· (5) 
j=1 
X j=l 
Formally, fi ( x j) assumes the role of soft evidence in 
a Bayesian network defined by the potentially un­
normalized conditional probabilities P( x j I IIi )A (Ap­
pendix 6.1). 
We can calculate update equations by setting the 
derivatives of the cost function with respect to the pa­
rameters to zero. We obtain 
1 
q;j = 2 2 "' 
Q(. \ )2 X 
(6) 
qi L...x\xi 
z, X Xj 
(L(2xj -1)P(x)Q(i,x\xj) + L Q(i,x\xj)2 
X 
x\Xj 
+ 2::(1-2qtj) L Q(xill) Q(i, x \ Xj) Q(j, x \ Xj)) 
l,l;ti 
x\xi 
where Q( i, X\ Xj) = q; nf=1,k;t!j qft (1 - q;k )1-x•. All 
summations can be calculated efficiently by using Ob­
servation 1. Updating the parameters using Equa­
tion 6 performs component wise minimization of the 
cost function. 
The optimization of the component weights q; is a low 
dimensional quadratic zPtimization problem with con­
straints q; > 0 and L:;=1 q; = 1. The gradient of SE 
with respect to a mixture component can also be cal­
culated efficiently using Observation 1. 
Note that since we can evaluate the distance measure 
SE efficiently, we can easily decide if we supplied a 
sufficient number of mixture components for obtaining 
a good approximation. 
2.4 
The Expected Mean Squared Error 
Alternatively, we might consider the expected mean 
squared error 
ESE(P(x)IIQ(x)) = LP(x)(P(x)- Q(x))2• 
Similar as in the previous section, we obtain the fixed 
point equations for the q;j, 
1 
% = Ex P(x)Q(i, X\ Xj)2 X 
(7) 
(L(2xj-1)P(x)2Q(i, x\xj)2+ L P(x)Q(i, x\xj)2 
x 
x,xj=O 
+ L L(l-2xj)P(x) Q(xjll) Q(i,x\xi) Q(l,x\xj)) 
l,lt;i 
X 
All sums can be calculated efficiently using Observa­
tion 1. 
3 
Evidence and Inference 
If evidence is entered into the Bayesian network we can 
obtain a mixture approximation to the conditional dis­
tribution of the remaining variables given the evidence 
in the same way as described in the previous section. 
The mixture distribution for the unknown nodes may 
then be viewed as defining possible scenarios given our 
state of information. 
Having already computed a mixture approximation to 
the joint distribution there is of course a much simpler 
way to obtain a mixture model for the conditional dis­
tribution. Rather than propagating the evidence in the 
exact model and then reapproximating the conditional 
distribution with new mixture components and mixing 
weights, one can perform approximate inference in the 
mixture model directly: 
with 
Q(eli) = II q¥j(l- %)1-xi 
x;Ee 
and 
Q(uli) = II q¥j(l- %)1-xi 
x;Eu 
where e 
C x are the variables with evidence and 
u = x \ e are the remaining variables. The above equa­
tion shows that the conditional distribution Q(ule) is 
still a mixture distribution composed of the same 'un­
conditional scenarios', but the new mixture weights 
are proportional to 
q;Q(eli). 
That is, the effect of evidence is just a reweighting of 
the known scenarios, which makes the effects of the 
evidence clearly visible. Each mixture component is 
weighted by the product of q; (as before) and the prob­
ability of the evidence Q(eli) for that mixture compo­
nent. 
4 
Experiments 
4.1 
Modeling 
The goal of our experiments was to test the quality 
of the mixture solutions found by the different cost 

functions and algorithms. As a test case we used the 
well known chest clinic example. The chest clinic is 
a well documented Bayesian network (Lauritzen and 
Spiegelhalter, 1988) consisting of the 8 variables visit 
to asia (1), smoker (2), tuberculosis (3), lung cancer 
(4), bronchitis (5), tuberculosis or lung cancer (6), pos­
itive x-rays (7) and dyspnoea (8). In this domain with 
only eight variables the algorithms for all cost func­
tions could be executed in reasonable time. The net­
work structure is defined in Appendix 6.2. 
In the first experiment the EM-algorithm using the 
KL-distance measure as described in Section 2.1 was 
used. Figure 1 shows the KL-distance between the true 
probability distribution and the approximate distribu­
tion using different number of components. A small 
KL-divergence is reached for only 4 mixture compo­
nents. If more components are used, the description 
is further refined but the KL-divergence does not im­
prove significantly. 
In the next experiment, the mixture parameters were 
calculated by minimizing the KL-distance and the SE 
and ESE distance measures using four and five mixture 
components. Table 1 and 2 show that for four or five 
mixture components only three mixture components 
obtain weights of more than 1% for all approaches. 
Figure 2 and 3 plot q;; (the probability for a positive 
finding of node j in scenario i) for the solutions ob­
tained by the three algorithms. Tables 1 and 2 show 
the mixture weights and the KL-distance of the mix­
ture approximations to the true probability distribu­
tion. We see that approximately half of the weight is 
assigned to a scenario describing healthy patients with 
a very low probability of any symptom and with ap­
proximately 30% probability of being a smoker. This 
mixture component really models two scenarios: one 
in which the healthy patient is a smoker and one where 
he or she is not a smoker. Approximately 40% prob­
ability mass is assigned to a group of patients with 
very high probability of bronchitis, high probability 
of dyspnoea and above average probability of being a 
smoker. Similarly as for the healthy patient, this mix­
ture component can be thought of as modeling four 
patient groups all of which have bronchitis but vary 
in the four possible configurations of being smokers 
and having dyspnoea.1 Approximately 5% probability 
mass is assigned to a group of patients with a very 
high probability of a positive x-ray, dyspnoea, a very 
high probability of lung cancer and a high probability 
of having bronchitis. In the model with five mixture 
'Note, that given the states of the remaining variables 
in this configuration, smoker and dyspnoea are likely to be 
independent; otherwise the mixture approximation would 
have had the tendency to assign more than one component 
to the bronchitis scenario. 
Mixture Approximations to Bayesian Networks 
643 
Table 1: KL-divergence and component weights for the 
four component model. 
I Approach I KL-dist I q1 
I q2 
I q3 
I q4 
KL 
0.0021 
0.530 
0.405 
0.055 
0.010 
SE 
0.0055 
0.522 
0.415 
0.053 
0.001 
ESE 
0.1090 
0.516 
0.415 
0.052 
0.004 
components about 1% or less probability mass is as­
signed to a group of persons with tuberculosis, slightly 
higher than normal probability of having visited asia, 
and with a high probability of having a positive x-ray 
and dyspnoea. In the four component model, both 
the KL-distance model and the SE model have also 
converged to this solution. 
Interestingly, the mixture components really "make up 
their mind" and converge to clearly identifiable sce­
narios. The solutions from the different approaches 
all agree in the scenarios which have obtained consid­
erable probability mass. In terms of KL-divergence 
(recall that KL-divergence is only minimized for one 
approach) the SE solution performs very well whereas 
the ESE-solution is considerably worse. This might 
be explained by the fact that ESE does not tend to 
penalize errors for states with small probabilities. 
Based on these experiments we might conclude that 
the SE-approach can provide solutions very simi­
lar both qualitatively and quantitatively to the KL­
solution. 
Figure 4 displays the results using the mixture of mean 
field solutions approach (Haft, Hofmann and Tresp, 
1999). First of all it is interesting to note that there 
are exactly three optima of the mean field equations. 
Approximately 91% of the probability mass is here as­
signed to the "normal" patient group with an average 
probability for smoking and bronchitis. The main dif­
ference to the first scenario of Figure 2 is that here the 
probability for bronchitis is higher. The second com­
ponent with approximately 7% of probability mass is 
almost identical to the third component in the previ­
ous solutions. Finally, the third solution with approx­
imately 1% of probability mass is very similar to the 
fourth component in the previous five component mod­
els. It appears that the main difference to the previous 
solutions is that the first component of the mean field 
solution approximates the first two components of the 
mixture approximations in the previous experiments. 
4.2 
Evidence and Inference 
When we enter evidence as described in Section 3 the 
scenarios are correspondingly re-weighted. Table 3 de­
scribes the new mixture weights when the evidence 

644 
Tresp, Haft, and Hofmann 
Figure 1: The mixture approximation using the KL­
distance. The x-axis indicates the number of mixture 
components and the y-axis the KL-distance between 
the mixture model and the Bayesian network. 
Table 2: KL-divergence and component weights for the 
five component model. 
I Appr I KL-dist I q1 
I q2 
I q3 
I q4 
I q5 
KL 
0.0020 
0.517 
0.404 
0.055 
0.010 
0.014 
SE 
0.0056 
0.522 
0.415 
0.043 
0.009 
0.012 
ESE 
0.0360 
0.513 
0.422 
0.052 
0.005 
0.008 
"dyspnoea=yes" and "smoker=yes" is entered. One 
can see, for example, that for the SE metric the first 
scenario (healthy person) has lost and the second (per­
son with bronchitis) and third (sick smoker) scenarios 
have gained weight as a result of the evidence - if 
compared to unconditional weights in Table 1. Ta­
ble 4 shows the marginal posterior probabilities com­
puted from the different mixture models. As could be 
expected from the low KL-distances between the ex­
act and all mixture models, the estimated probabilities 
are very close to the true probabilities. The KL-metric 
shows the best and the ESE-metric the worst approxi­
mation, but all three are within around one percentage 
point from the exact posteriors for all variables. 
Table 5 and Table 6 show the same experiment for 
the unlikely evidence "visit to Asia=yes" and "x­
ray=positive" which has a probability of only 0.15% in 
the model. Even though the KL-distance between the 
exact (unconditioned) model and the mixture models 
is low, the KL-distance of the corresponding condi­
tioned models can be large, because a small absolute 
error in the estimated probability of an unlikely event 
causes only a small KL-distance, but a large relative er­
ror in the probability of that event. This, however, can 
lead to a large absolute error in the probabilities con­
ditioned on that event. We therefore expect stronger 
deviations in the probabilities for this second example. 
Table 6 shows indeed stronger deviations than Table 4. 
The KL-model is still extremely good, the SE-model 
shows deviations in the range of 5% percentage points, 
whereas the ESE-model is completely wrong in its es-

H> •; -5 _:_ - _: __ :_ m1 
H 3 lil : • 8 9- <l 
i·[ A-[ 6- 4 l d_ 7I 
visit asia 
smoker 
tuberc. 
cancer 
brooch. 
lor c. 
x-ray 
dyspnoea 
Figure 2: The component parameters qij for the mix­
ture model with four components i = 1, 2, 3, 4. The 
filled bars show the result using the KL-divergence, 
the gray bars using the SE error function, and the 
empty bars using the ESE-error function. 
It 2 : : : : 0 J 
l·L_ iiJ _:_ _:_I_:_ 1 Ill 
It_ I E-- F --·l 
lt 
It 
I_:_ !-=l 
d_ _:_1 :D 1 j_ BCD 
visit asia 
smoker 
tubeoc. 
cancer 
bronch. 
lorQ 
x-ray 
dyspooea 
Figure 3: Same as in Figure 2 but with five compo­
nents. 

Mixture Approximations to Bayesian Networks 
645 
Figure 4: The solution obtained by the mean field ap­
proximation. There are exactly three solutions. The 
mixture weights are 0.919 (component 1), 0.069 (com­
ponent 2) and 0.012 (component 3). The KL-distance 
between the true probability distribution and the mix­
ture approximation is 0.304. 
Table 3: Reweighted mixture weights for evidence 
"dyspnoea=yes" and "smoker=yes". 
( Appr. ( q1 
( q2 
( q3 
( q4 
KL 
0.0715 
0.7434 
0.1692 
0.0159 
SE 
0.0705 
o. 7445 
0.1704 
0.0147 
ESE 
0.0621 
0.7724 
0.1655 
0.0000 
timation of the probability of TBC. This is probably 
due to the fact that deviations from the exact model 
in regions of low probability have a particularly low 
weight in the ESE-metric. So both the KL- and the 
SE-model still give useful results even in this case of 
unlikely evidence. 
5 
Conclusions 
We have demonstrated that a mixture approximation 
can give interesting new insights into the relationships 
between the variables in a probability domain mod­
eled by a Bayesian network. Furthermore, we have 
shown that the complexity of the computational cost 
for calculating the parameters in the mixture mod­
els depends critically on the distance measure. For 
a quadratic distance measure, parameter optimization 
can be executed efficiently using the junction tree al­
gorithm. We have show that experimentally, the so-
Table 5: Reweighted mixture weights for the (unlikely) 
evidence "visit to Asia=yes" and "x-ray=positive". 
I Appr. I q1 
I q2 
I q3 
I q4 
I 
KL 
0.1749 
0.1338 
0.3670 
0.3242 
SE 
0.2127 
0.1650 
0.3595 
0.2627 
ESE 
0.2321 
0.4921 
0.2045 
0.0714 
lutions found by minimizing the KL-distance (which 
is computationally infeasible for large networks) and 
a squared error cost function are basically identical. 
The significant components in each mixture model 
clearly make up their mind and are very different. We 
have compared these results to those obtained using 
multiple mean field solutions. Here, maxima in the 
backward KL-distance are found and form the mix­
ture components. The mean field solutions have been 
used recently for approximate inference and learning in 
various large intractable networks, for example by Pe­
terson and Anderson (1987), Saul, Jaakkola and Jor­
dan (1996), Kappen and Rodriguez (1997), Bishop, 
Lawrence, Jaakkola and Jordan (1998), Lawrence, 
Bishop and Jordan (1998) and Haft, Hofmann and 
Tresp (1999). For those large networks in which the 
junction tree algorithm is computationally infeasible, 
mean field approximations are still the only viable op­
tion for inference, besides Monte Carlo methods. For 
smaller networks in which the junction tree algorithm 
can be used, the algorithms presented here are applica­
ble. Finally, we have shown how the mixture approxi­
mation can be used to obtain both a mixture model for 
the unknown nodes composed of reweighted scenarios 
and approximations to conditional probabilities. The 
inference based on the mixture approximation appears 
to be reasonable precise, as long as the inference does 
not depend on a very accurate model of the underlying 
probability distribution; the latter is the case when the 
evidence entered into the model is very unlikely.
