1	
  
	
  
	
  
IF	
  THE	
  PROSPECT	
  OF	
  SOME	
  OCCUPATIONS	
  ARE	
  STAGNATING	
  WITH	
  TECHNOLOGICAL	
  ADVANCEMENT?	
  A	
  TASK	
  
ATTRIBUTE	
  APPROACH	
  TO	
  DETECT	
  EMPLOYMENT	
  VULNERABILITY 
	
  
Iftekhairul Islam 
School of Economics, Public Policy, and Political Science 
The University of Texas at Dallas 
 

Fahad Shaon 
Erik Jonsson School of Engineering and Computer Science 
The University of Texas at Dallas 

Abstract	
  
Two distinct trends can prove the existence of technological unemployment in the US. First, there are more open jobs than the 
number of unemployed persons looking for a job, and second, the shift of the Beveridge curve. There have been many attempts 
to find the cause of technological unemployment. However, all of these approaches fail when it comes to evaluating the impact 
of modern technologies on employment future. This study hypothesizes that rather than looking into skill requirement or routine 
non-routine discrimination of tasks, a holistic approach is required to predict which occupations are going to be vulnerable with 
the advent of this 4th industrial revolution, i.e., widespread application of AI, ML algorithms, and Robotics. Three critical 
attributes are considered: bottleneck, hazardous, and routine. Forty-five relevant attributes are chosen from the O*NET database 
that can define these three types of tasks. Performing Principal Axis Factor Analysis, and K-medoid clustering, the study 
discovers a list of 367 vulnerable occupations. The study further analyzes the last nine years of national employment data and 
finds that over the previous four years, the growth of vulnerable occupations is only half than that of non-vulnerable ones 
despite the long rally of economic expansion. 
Keywords: technological unemployment, innovation, skill gap, K-medoid clustering
1.	
  Introduction	
  
Unemployment has been a crucial issue for governments as 
well as policymakers around the world for quite a long time. 
It has a consequence not only for the social, political and 
economic life of individuals but also for the overall economy 
and development of a country (Dickens et al. 1994). The social 
and political enterprise of people surrounding an unemployed 
person are also adversely affected. (McClelland et al. 2000). 
As unemployment has extensive ramifications in different 
policy areas ranging from welfare, education, tax and 
investment to health, crime, and other social issues as well as 
to political stability, both federal and state governments are 
keen to address this problem with all the tools within their 
arsenal, i.e., fiscal and monetary policies and other 
administrative strategies and schemes. However, without an 
effective and robust prediction mechanism concerning future 
employment scenarios, such policies would be pointless.  
Therefore it is necessary to have a deep understanding of why 
unemployment occurs in the first place. There could be 
multifaceted reasons. According to Krugman (1994), the 
causes of unemployment can be separated into two broad 
categories: cyclical and structural. The former depends on 
fluctuations of aggregate demand and the latter on 
demographic shifts, changes in labor market institutions, or 
technological innovations.   
Unlike cyclical unemployment, which is typically short term, 
easily predictable, and dependent on market forces, structural 
unemployment is longer lasting and caused by different 
externalities which may or may not be directly related to 
economic indicators (Mocan 1999). Such externalities could 
be policy shifts, globalization, or new product and process 
innovations. When there is an initiation of new business or 
production process, a severe skill mismatch can emerge; 
companies need competent workers, but the existing workers 
lack the necessary skills (Manacorda et al. 1999). As it takes 
substantial time to learn new skills, structural unemployment 
can last for a long time unless some radical initiatives in 
training and education are taken.  
Lack of skill is not the only reason for structural 
unemployment. Sometimes a whole region can be affected 
because of a lack of farsightedness and vision from 
governments and policymakers. Fagerberg et al. (1997) 
investigate the causes of structural unemployment in different 
European countries and find that it prevails more in those 
countries with less investment in research and development. 
In these countries the diffusion of technology in production 
and manufacturing sectors is limited. 
We can find a trace of structural unemployment in the US. 
As of the latest ‘Job opening and labor turnout summary' 
published by BLS in November 2019, the number of job 
openings is 6.9 million, hires is 5.8 million, and separations 
(quits, layoffs, and discharges) is 5.3 million. The situation is 
there is a job for everyone, but still, there is a persistent 
unemployment rate of 3.8%. Most of these unemployed 

	
  
	
  
2	
  
	
  
	
  
people are active job seekers but without any success. This 
scenario is a telltale sign of structural unemployment. 
 
Figure 1: Number of unemployed persons per job opening 
Source: US Bureau of Labor Statistics 
 
For the first time since this Job Openings and Labor 
Turnover Survey (JOLTS) has been published, the ratio has 
fallen below 1, meaning more number of jobs are offered in 
the economy than the number of unemployed persons. The 
shaded area represents recession, as determined by the 
National Bureau of Economic Research. 
There is another way to find out if an economy is facing 
structural unemployment, the Beveridge curve which shows 
an inverse relationship between labor demand and labor 
supply over time. The curve plots job opening rates on the 
vertical axis and unemployment rate on the horizontal axis. A 
shift of this curve to the right provides evidence of structural 
unemployment (Nickell et al. 2001). We can detect an 
apparent shift of this curve from early 2010 to the end of 2018 
comparing to the 2000-2009 period.  With further observation, 
we identify that in the last few months of 2018 the 
unemployment rate was lower than the job openings rate, 
confirming the existence of structural unemployment. There is 
thus a clear indication of skill mismatch between what 
employers want and what prospective workers can provide.  
 
Figure 2: The Beveridge curve 
Source: US Bureau of Labor Statistics 
2.	
  Causes	
  of	
  structural	
  unemployment	
  
There have been many efforts to find the cause of structural 
unemployment, but none of them has provided conclusions 
that hold true under every scenario or time frame. The most 
popular attempt is called the Skill-Biased Technological 
Change (SBTC) hypothesis, according to which the diffusion 
of technology increases the demand for high-skilled and 
educated 
workers 
and 
less-skilled 
workers 
become 
underemployed or sometimes completely out of employment. 
(Acemoglu 1995). SBTC involves a shift towards capital 
intensive production techniques that bolstered relative wages 
of skilled laborers by enhancing relative productivity. This 
phenomenon was conspicuous in the years after the 2nd World 
War when the widespread application of technology in 
production 
and 
manufacturing 
became 
commonplace 
(Violante, 2016). 
A ‘hollowing out of the middle’ effect introduced doubts 
concerning the validity of SBTC theory. The overall demand 
for jobs is not perfectly linear with skill level and the demand 
for workers with mid-level skill or mid-ranked jobs has been 
declining in overall market share since the late 1970s relative 
to low-skilled and high-skilled workers, as shown by figure 3 
and 4. 
This phenomenon of job polarization could not be 
explained by the SBTC hypothesis. To overcome this 
drawback, Autor et al. (2001) advanced a Routine-Replacing 
Technological 
Change 
(RRTC) 
or 
Routine-biased 
Technological Change (RBTC) hypothesis. As per this theory, 
job susceptibility due to technological change is not a function 
of skill. Instead, it is directly related to the types of tasks one 
performs in doing one’s job, as suggested by Table 1. 
 

	
  
	
  
3	
  
	
  
	
  
 
 
Figure 3: ‘Hollowing out of the middle’ effect 
Source: Autor et al. (2001) 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Percentage change in employment share by  
job-quality decile 
Source: Goos et al. (2007) 
 
This phenomenon of job polarization could not be explained 
by the SBTC hypothesis. To overcome this drawback, Autor 
et al. (2001) advanced a Routine-Replacing Technological 
Change (RRTC) or Routine-biased Technological Change 
(RBTC) hypothesis. As per this theory, job susceptibility due 
to technological change is not a function of skill. Instead, it is  
directly related to the types of tasks one performs in doing 
one’s job, as suggested by Table 1. 
Table 1: Task metrics of an occupation 
 
Job type  
Manual 
Cognitive 
Analytical 
Interpersonal 
Routine 
Most 
vulnerable 
Moderate 
Vulnerable 
Moderate 
Vulnerable 
Non-
routine 
Moderate 
Vulnerable 
Least 
Vulnerable 
Least 
Vulnerable 
 
The hypothesis postulates that routine-manual jobs are the 
most vulnerable and jobs that demand cognitive input and 
non-routine maneuvering are the least vulnerable to new and 
more advanced technology in the production and service 
sectors. Figure 5 supports of their claim. 
 
	
  
Figure 5: Worker task constituents in the US economy from 
1960-2009. 
Source: Autor et al., (2013) 
While Autor’s hypothesis explain why the number of middle-
ranked jobs is declining they have become irrelevant with the 
advent of Artificial Intelligence (AI), Machine Learning 
Algorithms, and high-end, agile robots. The tasks the new 
machines and algorithms perform cannot be defined by limited 
routine, non-routine or cognitive, manual task metrics. To 
predict job vulnerability due to this latest technology, it is 
necessary to take into consideration not only the skill level of 
workers or task constituents of a job, but all job requirement 
variables, i.e., abilities, capacities, experience, training and 
education, job context, etc. (Frey et al., 2017). A holistic 
approach has to be taken to grasp the true impact of the latest 
trends in technology on the overall job market. 
There has been no recent attempt to pinpoint which jobs are 
susceptible and which are not, taking into account this very 
recent trends in innovation i.e., AI and Robotics. The previous 
literature has tried to detect vulnerability by sector 
(manufacturing, service, agriculture), or industries (health, 

	
  
	
  
4	
  
	
  
	
  
education, finance, management, etc.) or types of jobs (routine 
or non-routine), or skill requirement of jobs (high or low) 
We know of no undertaking that investigates why the prospect 
of some employments are diminishing over the past several 
years despite the long rally of economic expansion. This study 
would like to shed some light on this issue in the line with 
‘task- attribute’ approach, which is an amalgamation (broadly) 
of the classical hypotheses and present-day analysis and 
findings. 
3.	
  Material	
  and	
  methods	
  
3.1.	
  Datasets	
  
For the study, two sources of datasets have been used, Bureau 
of Labor Statistics (BLS) and Occupational Information 
Network (O*NET). BLS provides full spectrum employment 
data from all the USA states and its territories. It also 
categorizes the data in terms of sectors and industries. This 
study has used employment data from 2010 to 2018. It is only 
concerned with the total number of national-level employment 
from each SOC (Standardized Occupational Code) and how 
its distribution changed each year. O*NET contains detailed 
occupational definitions of all the SOC-coded employments 
of BLS. O*NET explains all the jobs using more than 180 job 
features, under the broad categories of abilities, context, skills, 
knowledge, interests, work style, and work activities. The 
defining process is extremely elaborative and exhaustive. For 
each job and corresponding features, O*NET provides with an 
importance level of the feature for that particular job. In Figure 
6, the study shows a standardized importance score of selected 
features for some occupations. 
 
Figure 6: Importance score of selected features 
The researchers interview people from different professions 
and ask them questions, both general and specific to their 
respective professions. Then they create a Likert scale ranging 
from 0 to 5. A score of 0 means that attribute is not at all 
important for that occupation and a score of 5 means very 
important. Based on these surveys they come up with an 
importance level for a particular attribute of a particular 
occupation. After that, the scores are standardized following a 
general formula. For example, we take the attribute ‘speaking’ 
for a lawyer and a paralegal. For both the professions, it is a 
very important requirement. But, their importance level is 
different. For lawyer, it is 70 and for a paralegal, it is 50. As 
these interviews are taken every year, any change in the 
importance level of an attribute of a particular occupation is 
reflected in the database within a year. 
Cleaning and processing of datasets are imperative steps to 
make sense of these data. The way O*NET stores the 
information is difficult for comparison. The importance level 
of all the attributes (more than 180 variables for most of the 
occupations) is scattered over 1,110 files. PYTHON scripting 
facilitates downloading and merging these files. Because not 
all of the attributes are applicable to AI and robots, a subset of 
the whole dataset is created. As each attribute has an 
individual ID, it is used as the primary key to create a 
relational database using MYSQL. 
For this analysis, all the occupations that are present in both 
O*NET and BLS databases and with relevant SOC codes are 
considered. After leaving the occupations with missing data, 
the study is left with 966 occupations. These occupations are 
the observations for this study. 
3.2.	
  Variables	
  selection	
  	
  
Most of the relevant variables are initially chosen from the 180 
odd variables listed in occupational characteristics based on 
the ‘engineering bottleneck’ concept. According to this 
concept even though AI and robots can perform different non-
routine cognitive and non-routine manual tasks, contemporary 
technology still falls short of expectation when it comes to 
such tasks as perception and manipulation, creative 
intelligence, social intelligence, etc. (Frey et al. 2013). The 
basic premise of the hypothesis is that there are some choke 
points that cannot be resolved by the current level of 
technological development when it comes to imitating human 
behavior, skill, and intuition that are critical for performing 
some occupational tasks, i.e., judgment, coordination, social 
perceptiveness, teamwork, etc. On top of these ‘bottleneck’ 
variables, we take into account contemporary research and 
articles on AI and robotics to decide on the occupational 
attributes that are going to be or already being emulated by AI 
or robots with higher precision and effectiveness, i.e., pattern 
recognition, repetitive motion, manual dexterity, etc. These 
attributes fall into routine work category, i.e., not much critical 
thinking, complex problem solving, or originality is required, 
rather following a well-defined set of rules is enough to 
perform the job properly. The database provides 41 attributes, 
which are either very difficult to emulate (engineering 
bottlenecks) or already being in the process of replacement 
(routine and repetitive) by AI and robots. 
There are some contextual attributes of some professions that 
could be detrimental for human lives, i.e., working in 
hazardous conditions, exposure to contamination and 
radiation, etc. As no one can take chances with human lives, 
these kinds of jobs are sure to be replaced by robots as soon as 
0
20
40
60
80
100
Importance	
  score	
  of	
  selected	
  
features
Chief	
  Executives
Economists
Registered	
  Nurses
Energy	
  Brokers
Barbers
Nuclear	
  Engineers

	
  
	
  
5	
  
	
  
	
  
technology reaches the threshold level. (Takayama et al. 
2008), Maney (2018), Clay (2014). For this reason, we have 
introduced 4 more variables that are related to hazardous and 
risky tasks. In the end, we have 45 relevant variables to further 
our analysis of understanding vulnerable occupations due to 
AI and robots. Table 6, gives an example of some variables as 
per these three types of broad features. Finally, our database 
now constitutes a 966X45 matrix reduced from the initial 
1110X180 matrix due to data availability and relevancy issue. 
 
 
Table 6: Features and contexts 
 
Relevant Features 
Selected variables 
Engineering 
bottleneck 
Negotiation, Critical thinking, 
Empathy, Persuasion etc. 
Hazardous context 
Exposed to Contaminants, Very 
Hot or Cold Temperatures etc. 
Routine work 
Finger Dexterity, Repetitive 
motions etc. 
 
3.3.	
  Data	
  reduction	
  using	
  Principal	
  Axis	
  Factor	
  
Analysis	
  
After merging and cleaning the dataset, 966 occupations 
remain, along with the 45 necessary and relevant variables 
scaled by their respective importance levels. As many of these 
variables were correlated (both Barlett sphericity and Kyser-
Meyer-Olkin tests are performed), a principal axis factor 
analysis (PAFA) is undertaken to isolate the independent 
dimensions of variation. Principal axis factor analysis is a 
statistical technique that helps to reduce a large set of 
independent variables to a smaller and meaningful set of 
summary variables. It assists in exploring the latent construct 
of a phenomenon that may be present in several independent 
variables simultaneously. 
3.3.1.	
  Number	
  of	
  factors	
  
Before performing the factor analysis, the study has performed 
‘Parallel Analysis’ to find the optimum number of factors. In 
this case, the number could be from 6 to 8. 
After performing the analysis, the best result is 7 factors, a 
solution that has the highest Tucker-Lewis value of 0.83. The 
root mean square of residuals (RMSR) is 0.02. This is 
acceptable as this value should be close to 0. The RMSEA 
index is 0.092, and BIC is 1477.06. Both these values are 
better than factor results with other factor numbers. 
 
 
Figure 7: Parallel Analysis scree plot 
3.3.2.	
  Factor	
  loadings	
  
Figure 8 shows how the original variables loaded onto each 
factor in the 7-factor orthogonally rotated PAFA solution. 
3.3.3.	
  Interpretation	
  of	
  factors	
  
We interpret the six basic skill-dimensions as follows: 
Problem-solving and repetitive work 
At one end, this factor involves spotting complex problems 
and assessing relevant information to develop and evaluate 
different options and implement the best solution. It also 
requires the performance of cost-benefit analysis of potential 
actions using logic and reasoning. This factor is important for 
identifying the strengths and weaknesses of alternative 
solutions, conclusions or approaches to problems. At the 
opposite end of the scale is repetitive work, doing a ‘patterned’ 
job that doesn’t require out of the box thinking. Such jobs can 
be very easily codified, as there is not much dispersion from 
the linear and well-defined job description. As per the 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), “a 
highly repetitive job can be characterized by one of the 
following: A cycle time less than 30 seconds. Over 1,000 parts 
per shift, or more than 50% of the cycle time involving the 
same kind of fundamental cycle”. Repetitive work can be 
harmful to a worker as it could be instrumental to 
musculoskeletal disorders. (PSHSA, 2010) 
Negotiation and leadership capacity 
This factor involves getting others onto the same page and 
trying to bridge the gaps in opinions and attitudes. It also 
requires adjusting one’s actions in tandem to the counterpart’s 
actions. Sometimes it could also demand to persuade others to 
change action or behavior as per the changing contexts. This 
factor is also important in handling and resolving complaints, 
discontents, and grievances. 

	
  
	
  
6	
  
	
  
	
  
Exposure to hazard 
This factor requires doing a job that is exposed to 
contaminants (such as pollutants, gases, dust or odors), 
radiation (gamma, X-rays), risky machineries (moving parts, 
overhead cranes), very hot (above 90 F degrees) or very cold 
(below 32 F degrees) temperatures, loud noise (construction 
sites). Some jobs involve working in a high, uneven places 
(tree pruning, roofing). Few professions i.e., soldiers, deep-sea 
explorers, and firefighters are inherently exposed to various 
vulnerable scenarios. All such jobs that are exposed to 
hazardous conditions require a high level of depth perception 
(distinguishing between near and distant objects) and manual 
dexterity (agile body movement). 
 
Empathy 
This factor means being conscious of others' reactions and 
grasping why they react this way. It also requires being 
sensitive to others' needs and accommodating any legitimate 
demand. This factor involves being amiable to others on the 
job and demonstrating a cooperative, gracious attitude. It 
entails deep comprehension of human behavior and conduct 
and individual differences in ability, performance, personality, 
and interests.  
 
Artistic ability 
This factor involves researching and developing new 
applications, processes or products. Sometimes it also requires 
the worker to design, create and implement unique, state-of-
the-art ideas and schemes.  
 
Coordination/Leading capacity  
This factor entails engaging everyone to pursue a common 
goal. Coordination involves funneling and optimizing 
everyone’s effort to achieve the target of the team as a whole. 
This factor helps in creating synergy among all the team 
players so that they can deliver what is expected from them. 
Knowledge over other team member’s limitations and 
strengths is also a key component of this factor. 
  
	
  
 
Figure 8: Factor loadings 
 
	
  
	
  
-­‐1
-­‐0.5
0
0.5
1
Originality
Mathematical.Reasoning
Oral.Comprehension
Written.Comprehension
Investigative
Judgment.and.Decision
Critical.Thinking
Complex.Problem.Solving
Repetitive.Motions
Making.Decisions
Manual.Dexterity
Finger.Dexterity
Depth.Perception
Very	
  Hot
Exposed	
  Contamination
Hazardous	
  Conditions
Hazardous	
  Equipment.
Innovation
Fine.Arts
Thinking.Creatively
Artistic
Social
Cooperation
Psychology
Philosophy.and.Theology
Social.Perceptiveness
Deal.With.Unpleasant
Social.Orientation
Concern.for.Others
Negotiation
Persuasion
Coordination
Resolving.Conflicts
Administration.and.Man…
Interpersonal.Relations…
Developing.Objectives
Selling.or.Influencing.Ot…
Performing.Administrati…
Guiding..Subordinates
Judging.the.Qualities
Developing..Teams
Leadership
Work.With..Team
Coordinate.or.Lead.Oth…
Factor	
  loadings
Initial	
  varaibles
Factor	
  Loadings
Coordination
Artistic
Empathy
Hazard
Negotiation
Problem-­‐solving

	
  
	
  
7	
  
	
  
	
  
3.4	
  Susceptibility	
  to	
  AI	
  and	
  Robotics	
  
 
If we observe closely we see that the factor ‘Hazard’ i.e., risk 
exposure (Ford 2015), and dexterity (Strickland 2016) is the 
most susceptible characteristic in terms of the scope and 
capacity of modern AI algorithms and robotics. Factor 
‘problem solving’ displays an inverse relation between 
problem-solving and robotics- susceptible repetitive motion. 
Occupations with low or negative scores on this factor are 
vulnerable. Other factors i.e., negotiation capacity, empathy, 
coordination and artistic are not vulnerable. (Russel et al. 
2016). They are extremely difficult for AI and robots to 
emulate with the current level of research and development. 
This study then focuses on these susceptible factors to derive 
the list of occupations that are most likely to be affected by 
contemporary technological innovation. The list is created by 
taking the top 20 percent of occupations that scored high on 
the ‘Hazard’ factor and the bottom 20 percent of occupations 
that scored low on the ‘Problem-solving’ factor. Seven types 
of susceptibility are found based on these factors. (Figure 9) 
 
3.5	
  Conditioned	
  Vulnerability:	
  K-­‐Medoid	
  Clustering	
  
Not all occupations with similar vulnerabilities are equally at 
risk from technological change. Vulnerabilities need to be 
adjusted by accounting for other factors. For example, we can 
take the cases of barbers and surgeons. Both these professions 
are heavily dependent on dexterity with factor scores of 2.85 
and 1.55 respectively. These occupations might be at risk due 
to cutting-edge development in robotic 
arms. But to perform the job of a surgeon unlike a barber, other 
factors are also critical. If we take into account other 
occupational attributes (critical thinking, coordination, 
judgment and decision, empathy), we can understand how 
distinct these two professions are in terms of replicability.  
We, therefore, need an adjusted classification of occupations 
that merges vulnerability with conditioning characteristics. 
For that we must take into consideration the ‘bottleneck’ 
attributes that are difficult to emulate.  
To that end, we use k-medoid clustering (PAM, as Partitioning 
around Medoids), in the full 7-factor space that took into 
consideration all the relevant factors, vulnerable and ‘anti’ 
vulnerable. 
 
	
  3.5.1.	
  Optimum	
  Number	
  of	
  Clusters	
  
To proceed with the k-medoid clustering procedure, we have 
to first decide on the number of optimum clusters. The 
fundamental characteristics of any clustering algorithm are 
that distance (similarity) of elements of the same cluster 
should 
be 
minimum 
and 
the 
intra-cluster 
distance 
(dissimilarity) should be maximum. (Rousseeuw P. J., 1987). 
The ‘Silhouette Coefficient’ technique is used to derive an 
initial number of clusters in the 6-space. Silhouette, s(i) is 
calculated using the following function: 
 
 
Figure 9: Percentage of affected occupations based on factor-
score 
 
1-a(i)/b(i)     if a(i) < b(i), 
    s = 
0 
        if a(i) = b(i), 
          b(i)/a(i) – 1  if a(i) > b(i), 
where,  
a(i) is average dissimilarity of an element i to all other 
elements within a cluster, 
d(I,C) is average dissimilarity of I to all the elements of 
another cluster C, 
b(i) is minimum d(i,C) 
The above function can be rewritten as the following  
𝑠𝑖= 	
  
𝑏𝑖−𝑎(𝑖)
𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑎𝑖, 𝑏(𝑖) 	
   
 

	
  
	
  
8	
  
	
  
	
  
 
Figure 10: An illustration of the computation of silhouette 
distance s(i) 
We can see silhouette value is highest for 7 number of 
clusters. If we take more than or less than 7 clusters 
silhouette value decreases. (Figure 11) 
	
  
Figure 11: Optimum number of clusters 
 
Figure 13 is a silhouette of the 7 clusters in the 7-space, with 
medoid results and sample occupations detailed in the 
appendix. Of the 8 clusters of occupations, only 3 have an 
immediate vulnerability (3, 6 and 7), located on one side of 
the red ‘vulnerability bisector’ in the figure. 
 
 
Figure 12: K-medoid clustering method 
Source: Pramudita et al. (2018) 
 
3.5.2.	
  K-­‐Medoid	
  Clustering	
  
This algorithm (known as Partitioning around medoid) was 
first proposed in 1987 by two famous mathematicians, 
Kaufman and Rousseeuw. It is more robust to outliers and 
noises (Han et al. 2011) than the more popular clustering 
algorithm k-means clustering. While k-means uses a mean 
point as the center of the cluster (which may not be a real point 
in that cluster), k-medoid uses an actual point (medoid) or 
member in the cluster to categorize it. A medoid of a particular 
cluster is the most representative element of the cluster, i.e., a 
medoid’s similarities with the other member of the same 
cluster is the minimum.   
 
3.5.3.	
  Procedure	
  for	
  K-­‐Medoid	
  Clustering	
  
K-medoid initiates with selecting a random element for each 
number of cluster, i.e. k number of medoids for k number of 
clusters. All other elements are included in the nearby cluster 
in terms of the features or factor scores for the current 
scenario. After the initial point, a new medoid is chosen for 
every cluster and it is tested against the current medoid to see 
if the value cost function (dissimilarities between each data 
item and its corresponding medoid) is less or more. If cost is 
less than the previous medoid than the new point becomes the 
medoid for that cluster. After a sufficient number of iterations, 
the algorithm converges 

	
  
	
  
9	
  
	
  
	
  
𝑍=
𝑥−𝑚.
/
.01
 
Z: Sum of error (absolute) for all the points of the dataset 
x: A data point in the data space 
𝑚. : Medoid for cluster 𝐶. 
 
 
  
Figure 13: PAM clustering of occupations 
 
3.5.4.	
  K-­‐Medoid	
  Result	
  
 
Of the 8 clusters of occupations, we can find only 3 of them 
have an immediate vulnerability because these clusters have 
high factor scores on susceptible factors or very low scores on 
‘bottle-neck’ factors. (Figure 14). On the contrary, 5 clusters 
have high factor scores in more than 2 ‘bottle-neck’ factors 
making them not immediately vulnerable. (Figure 15). There 
are altogether 408 occupations in these 3 clusters. A list of the 
occupations is provided in the appendix. One thing we must 
understand, here no attempt is made to make a ranking of 
vulnerability, i.e., high-mid-low vulnerability. Rather the 
study just looks at the vulnerable factors and segregates the 
occupations in terms of factor scores using k-medoid 
clustering algorithms. 
A cursory look of the occupations gives us the idea that most 
of the jobs are low paid, highly repetitive, low skilled, and 
doesn’t require more than a high school degree. Most of the 
occupations are from mining, agriculture, transportation,  
 
retail, and manufacturing industries. On the other hand, not 
surprisingly health care, hospitality, and education industries 
seem to be immune to these trends of prolific application of  
AI, and Robotics in workplace. Professional and business 
industries and state and federal government employees are 
also not so vulnerable. 
 
	
  
3.6	
  Real	
  Job	
  Trends	
  
The study further looks at the change of a number of jobs from 
all the occupations mentioned both in O*NET and BLS for the  
past 8 years. Initially, I measured the change in demand for 
jobs for all occupations. The study found that on average, the 
increase in jobs for the vulnerable occupations was only a little 
 

	
  
	
  
10	
  
	
  
	
  
 
 
Figure 14: Factor scores of non-vulnerable clusters 
 
over 1%, whereas the increase in demand for the non-
vulnerable jobs was almost 2.4% in these years. When I 
looked at this trend further, I noticed something interesting. I 
detected that the number of jobs that were more affected by 
AI and ML algorithms was decreasing at a higher rate (1.8% 
precisely). But, many of the vulnerable occupations that would 
mostly depend on dexterity or other ‘Robotic’ input were 
increasing, i.e., truck driver, firefighter etc. Again, not 
surprisingly number of warehouse helpers decreased two folds 
during the same period. My conclusion was that, even though 
current trends in robotics might put many jobs in a vulnerable 
condition, the threshold point of technology to replace human 
labor is still far away, and as of now, robots can replace them 
only in a ‘controlled’ environment. 
 
	
  
4.	
  Conclusion	
  
We can see the demand for quite a handful of occupations is 
decreasing over the past several years. As, the US economy 
has not been experiencing an economic downturn, or no major 
trade agreement or disruptions has taken place during these 
years (trade war with China is rather a contemporary issue 
 
 
 
Figure 15: Factor scores of vulnerable clusters 
 
and any major impact is yet to be seen), we can conclude this 
phenomenon is due to the technological shift in businesses and 
manufacturing sectors. We must figure out what occupations 
will be in demand and what relevant skills are required to fill 
up the positions. Otherwise, the US economy could hit a 
sudden roadblock, which could end up in a catastrophe.
