A 
conceptual 
framework 
of 
Intelligent 
Management 
Control 
System 
for 
Higher 
Education 
Helena Dudycz1, Marcin Hernes1, Zdzieław Kes1, Eunika Mercier-Laurent2, 
Bartłomiej Nita1 , Krzysztof Nowosielski1, Piotr Oleksyk1, Mieczysław L.  
Owoc1, Rafał Palak3, Maciej Pondel1, Krystian Wojtkiewicz3 
1Wrocław University of Economics and Bussiness, Komandorska 118/120, 53-345 Wrocław, 
Poland 
{helena.dudycz, marcin.hernes, zdzisław kes, bartłomiej.nita, krzysztof.nowosielski, 

2 University of Reims Champagne Ardennes, France 

3 Wroclaw University of Science and Technology, Poland 

Abstract. The utilization of management control systems in university management 
poses a considerable challenge because  university's strategic goals are not identical 
to those applied in profit-oriented management. A university's management control 
system should take into account the processing of management information for 
management purposes, allowing for the relationships between different groups of 
stakeholders. The specificity of the university operation assumes conducting long-
term scientific research and educational programmes. Therefore, the controlling ap-
proach to university management should considerat long-term performance meas-
urement as well as management in key areas such as research, provision of educa-
tion to students, and interaction with the tertiary institution’s socio-economic 
environment.This paper aims to develop a conceptual framework of the Intelligent 
Management Control System for Higher Education (IMCSHE) based on cognitive 
agents. The main findings are related to developing the assumption, model, and 
technological basis including the artificial intelligence method. 
Keywords: Management control system, Intelligent Systems, artificial intelli-
gence, higher education, cognitive technologies 

2  
1. Introduction 
The use of management control systems (MCS) in university management is a 
significant challenge because the universities' strategic objectives are not the same 
as those of profit-oriented businesses. Moreover, unlike enterprises, which mainly 
attach importance to increasing value for the owners, the competitive advantage - 
and thus the position - of a university among institutions which focus on scientific 
and educational activity stems from other sources and is oriented towards meeting 
the needs of a wide range of stakeholders. It is crucial to translate a university's 
strategy into its operation, which is intended to serve the purpose of enabling all 
members of the academic community to understand the strategy while streamlining 
the process of its implementation in the course of the tertiary institution's day-to-
day activity. A university's controlling system structure is closely related to its stra-
tegic goals and assumed directions of development. The triple helix concept, pro-
moted by H. Etzkowitz and L. Leydesdorff [1] can be used as a basis for defining 
the mission and strategy of a university. According to them, the triple helix is a 
model of relations occurring in the process of the creation of knowledge between 
three types of entities: scientific centres (academia), the industrial environment (in-
dustry), and public administration (state). The knowledge-based economy requires 
creative cooperation of modern universities with public administration and the eco-
nomic environment. The so-called quadruple helix and even quintuple helix con-
cepts are being postulated today [2]. The triple helix model is enriched by the media, 
civil society, and the natural environment. 
The MCS of a university should allow for the processing of management infor-
mation for the executive bodies' needs, taking into account the relations between 
different stakeholder groups. The specificity of a university's operation assumes 
conducting long-term research and offering long-term educational programmes. 
Therefore, university management's controlling approach should allow for long-
term performance measurement and management in critical areas, such as conduct-
ing research, educating students, and cooperating with the socio-economic environ-
ment. 
The design of MCS to support university management should include internal 
and external information. Processing internal information is complicated due to the 
multidimensionality of information aggregation objects and the wide range of stake-
holders. Access to prospective information allowing to assess the expected changes 
in operating conditions and determine future directions of action is limited because 
scientific research may produce uncertain results (i.e. there are no such methods). 
A useful tool for any university is to create scenarios for future decisions that can 
be generated to ensure the adopted development strategy's implementation. Moreo-
ver, as far as the decision-making process is concerned, it is necessary to process 
external information concerning factors including the following: 
- 
the demographic situation, 
- 
changes in legal regulations, 

3 
- 
the demand for graduates with new qualifications, 
- 
competitive entities' activity, 
- 
changes in the methods of education. 
Managing a university is a process of making decisions whose accuracy deter-
mines the effectiveness and efficiency of its educational and research activities. 
Therefore, analyses carried out under the MCS should enable the following, among 
other things: 
- 
evaluation of the university's ability to meet the requirements of the reg-
ulations governing higher education, 
- 
identification of the financial needs sources of research and sources of 
its funding, 
- 
symptoms of threat and the risk of a change in the competitive position, 
- 
directions of changes in the side areas of operation. 
A carefully developed and detail-oriented internal information system, constitut-
ing a response to signals coming from the environment, plays a vital role in sup-
porting university management. It is necessary to apply a detailed assessment of all 
aspects of the university's operation. The most common method of managing per-
formance in private and public sectors, including universities, is the Balanced 
Scorecard. The first generation of the Balanced Scorecard [3] was treated exclu-
sively as a method of measuring performance, while nowadays, it is a much more 
advanced concept, one that is continuously being developed. Today, R.S. Kaplan 
and D. P. Norton argue that their proposal can provide a framework for performance 
management geared towards implementing a strategy using intelligent control sys-
tems. 
The functioning of the MCS involves the processing of both structured and un-
structured knowledge. The artificial intelligence methods and tools can be used in 
this purpose. 
This paper aims to develop a conceptual framework of an Intelligent Manage-
ment Control System for Higher Education (IMCSHE) based on cognitive agents. 
The main contribution is related to the following:  
- 
The application of cognitive agents in a Management Control System for 
Higher Education, 
- 
A proposal for extending the Learning Intelligent Distribution Agent Archi-
tecture with a machine learning module. 
2. Related works 
During the theoretical foundations' analysis, attention was paid to the issues raised 
in studies dedicated to Management Control Systems (MCS) solutions implemented 
at universities, emphasizing the applications being within this study's scope. The 
overwhelming majority of the studies concernes the characteristics and evaluation 
of MSC systems used. Baid [4] researched types of control in schools. Its findings 

4  
show a positive relationship between teacher control, student control and the insti-
tution's performance. Al.-Tarawneh [5] conducted a study involving university pro-
fessors and students in the context of MSC use. In his view, professors who have 
less experience in higher education tend to use MSC more than those with many 
years of experience [5]. Beuren and Teixeira [6] researched the structure and func-
tions of MSC in assessing performance at private universities. Based on the results 
of the questionnaires sent to managers responsible for the strategy of educational 
institutions, it was found that the overall evaluation result for MCS reached an av-
erage of 3.62 on a 5-degree scale. According to Tanveer and Karim [7], universities 
must implement performance management (PM) procedures to improve their per-
formance and align their individual goals with the university's strategy. The evalu-
ation must consider the achievements of the researchers and the administration to 
an equal extent.  
A much smaller number of articles included information on the IT solutions being 
applied. The authors Cantele, Martini, and Campedelli [8] showed in their research 
an insignificant relationship between the degree of development of MCS and some 
specific features of state-run universities, such as size, complexity, degree of ex-
penditure rigidity, and availability of human resources assigned to administrative 
activities. Besides, they found that the planning and control tools used at universities 
include modules that enable the following:  
- 
economic and financial simulations, including planning under different 
scenarios;  
- 
processing information on the university's strategy, mission, and objec-
tives;  
- 
building long-term business plans that define strategies, goals, pro-
grammes, initiatives, and projects, as well as their implementation sched-
ules, project managers, allocated financial and human resources, and ob-
jectives to be achieved;  
- 
using management dashboards which provide performance indicators that 
can be used for both internal management and external communication;  
- 
cost calculation in sections such as master's studies, research projects, ac-
tivities and processes, responsibility centres; 
- 
budgeting and operational planning;  
- 
deviation analysis. 
Labas and Bacs [9]  present an MCS concept that includes a software structure. The 
MCS should be at the junction of field-specific systems (e.g. fixed assets manage-
ment, financial management, financial accounting, or human resources manage-
ment) and the management information system (MIS). Based on preliminary re-
search carried out, it can be concluded that there is a cognitive gap in IT support for 
MCS in organizations involved in academic teaching.   
Z Alach [10] proposes a model for assessing the maturity of performance manage-
ment systems in higher education controlling, which includes seven elements. This 
model was built based on normative research conducted by many authors. Z Alach 

5 
integrated these recommendations and empirically verified them, grouping all cri-
teria into three sets. The first group concerns the use of information on performance 
in university management and on whether the obtained results stem from the use of 
this information. The second group is focused on designing a performance manage-
ment system and its internal coherence. The last group refers to the elements that 
determine the system's usefulness. McCormack et al. [11] propose using 17 
measures for the evaluation and design of a university's controlling system. All the 
measures are divided into four categories: operational activity, monitoring, target-
ing of measures, and motivation systems. 
3. Research methodology 
In our research, we use the Design Science Research Process (DSRP) methodology 
[12]. This methodology involves the realization of research works as process-de-
pendent steps responsible for implementing basic tasks and delivering primary work 
artefacts. This methodology is based on five necessary steps. The first, "Awareness 
of problem", focuses on preparing a preliminary proposal for a new research topic. 
It results from the analysis of already available achievements and results in related 
scientific disciplines and industry (in our paper this phase is realized in the intro-
duction. The second, development of the proposal ("Suggestion"), follows the initial 
proposal and is a creative step to define new models, methods, and functionalities 
based on new configurations of existing or new elements. This phase is realized in 
the related works section. The third, constituting further development of the pro-
posal ("Development"), is where the initial research is developed and extended. The 
development is performed in the Framework of the system section. The fourth, 
"Evaluation", is when the prepared artefacts are evaluated according to the adopted 
criteria. The fifth, "Conclusion", can be the end of a given research cycle or end the 
entire research undertaking. The evaluation and conclusion are related in the Con-
clusions section. As outlined, each stage ends with a specific result, which then 
forms the basis for and enables the next step in the process. Besides, this methodol-
ogy assumes that it is possible to return to the previous steps under the observed 
restrictions. We use the literature of subject analysis, as a research method in the 
Awareness of the problem and the Suggestion stages. In the development stage, we 
use such research methods, as modelling, design and implementation and observa-
tion of phenomena's. The Evaluation we use research experiment method. Conclu-
sion phase we based on synthesis, analysis, induction and deduction research meth-
ods. 

6  
4.  The framework of the system 
The Intelligent Management Control System for Higher Education (IMCSHE) 
aims to provide information for the UEW's Balanced Scorecard (BSC). The score-
card includes four perspectives focusing on the following information: 
The financial perspective (F): 
- 
financial plans including a material and financial plan, the central budget 
of the university, partial budgets (budgets of subunits, tasks, or projects); 
- 
control aspects in terms of income and expenses (in cross-section of subu-
nits, tasks and projects) and financial and economic indicators. 
The customer perspective (C): 
- 
student segmentation; 
- 
change dynamics in student segments (degrees, types of studies, fields of 
study); 
- 
quality of education from the perspective of students and graduates (track-
ing the path of graduates' professional development) broken down into 
fields of study, specialties, modules, and subjects; 
- 
education quality indicators. 
The internal processes perspective (P): 
- 
human resources potential, including the structure and dynamics of em-
ployment broken down into degrees and academic titles, positions held, 
and functions performed; 
- 
scientific potential, including the number and quality of publications (IF 
and quality of publications), citation indicators, experience in research pro-
jects, the number of promoted doctoral students, the level of scientific re-
search commercialization, the impact of scientific activity on the function-
ing of the society and economy, research infrastructure, as well as the 
organization of conferences and scientific seminars; 
- 
educational potential, including flexibility in adopting the educational of-
fer to market needs, employee evaluation from the perspective of both, the 
student and the graduate, the number of promoted students, supervision of 
scientific associations, initiatives in the field of cooperation with students 
and their organizations, as well as teaching facilities; 

7 
- 
organizational potential, including the ability to develop pro-efficiency 
and pro-quality intra-organisational projects, work for the university envi-
ronment, and the organization of the internal units' operation. 
The development perspective (D): 
- 
 acquiring and conducting development projects, fully informed at HR de-
velopment, as well as management structures and infrastructure; 
- 
development level and evolution of IT systems supporting the implemen-
tation of all university processes; 
- 
level of organizational maturity. 
The diversity of perspectives enables the development of multidimensional re-
ports for managerial purposes. It also determines the architecture of the data aspect 
of the IMCSHE. The class diagram in Fig. 1. represents the simplified hierarchical 
structure of a university. Also, it shows how reports are generated. At this point, 
there were four types of reports distinguished concerning the identified perspec-
tives, namely: 
- 
Financial report, 
- 
Customer report, 
- 
Internal process report, 
- 
Development report. 
However, a new type of report could be defined if needed, since the generaliza-
tion set is not complete.  
The composition used between all levels of university management indicates that 
reports generated for each level of the university are used to calculate reports for 
higher university structures, e.g. in the case of a financial report, the sum of all 
expenses for projects in a given division will give the expense value in the financial 
report for this division. One of the project approach's main assumptions is that busi-
ness as usual (BAU) is also treated as a separate project. At first, we distinguished 
two types of organization unit: Faculty and Administration. The lower level is a 
division, which serves as a universal type of second-level descendant in the struc-
ture. The division report is created as a result of the aggregation of projects, i.e. the 
lowest level of university structure decomposition. Reports are complex structures 
built from various fields,  for each of which a separate aggregation function needs 
to be defined. At the top of the hierarchy is the university, which has reports derived 
from lower structure levels. The aggregation function allows us to derive the final 
report based on a chosen organizational structure level due to such a hierarchical 
structure. In particular, we do not need to include all levels in defining aggregation, 
instead only focusing on the minimum needed set of projects. However, each report 

8  
is based on an arbitrary set of report types, i.e., Financial report, Customer report, 
Internal process report, and Development report. All of them inherit from a report, 
which means that they share some properties, but at the same time, they focus on 
different perspectives. Final Report should reflect all the mentioned perspectives 
and creates summarised (including different measurable results) view on the uni-
versity state. 
 
Fig. 1. The simplified hierarchical structure of a university 
The component diagram (Fig. 2) shows the system's concept with a strong em-
phasis on data sources, i.e., the university's core IT systems. The integrated system 
communicates with each source component through a dedicated API and obtains 
the data from each of them. At first, the data feeds the data warehouse, where it is 
processed, and then the aggregated data is sent via a dedicated interface to the target 
iSIC component. Thus, the data warehouse is a crucial part of the system. The qual-
ity and structure of data delivered to the warehouse is undoubtedly the key indicator 
of system performance. In our concept, we focused on the following data sources: 
- 
Employee evaluation system – provides data about employee results; 
- 
USOS – provides data related to teaching, such as student surveys or data 
on financial settlements with students; 
- 
Lecture planning system – a system for sharing data on the allocation of 
items and teachers to rooms; 
- 
Publication repository – provides data on employees' publications; 

9 
- 
ERP – a system focusing on data such us: HR and payroll, organizational 
structure, and cost centres; 
- 
Budget Planning System (SIC) – a system used to define unit budgets 
(tasks and project budgets); 
- 
Expenses Control – a system focusing on tracking expenses; 
- 
Project repository - shares information on scientific, R&D, and organiza-
tional projects; 
- 
Infrastructure Management – provides information regarding the infra-
structure. 
 
 
Fig. 2. A concept of the Management Control System for Higher Education. 

10  
 
Such diverse data sources allow generating distinguished types of reports by the 
iSIC component.  The iSIC component consists of the artificial intelligence module. 
We use the Learning Intelligent Distribution Agent Architecture (LIDA), developed 
by Cognitive Computing Research Group (CCRG) [13, 14]. CCRG also developed 
the software framework of LIDA (in Java and Python). The reason for choosing this 
architecture is our many years' scientific experience in applying this architecture in 
management information systems [15, 16].  LIDA is a cognitive architecture, per-
forming tasks within a cognitive cycle. The knowledge is represented by a "slipnet" 
- a semantic network with nodes' and links' activation level. The learning process is 
permanently performed. LIDA consists of the following modules: 
- 
sensory memory, 
- 
perceptual memory, 
- 
episodic memory, 
- 
declarative memory, 
- 
workspace, 
- 
attentional codelets, 
- 
global workspace, 
- 
action selection, 
- 
sensory-motor memory. 
The communication between modules is handled by codelets - mobile software 
programs processing information. LIDA's functioning was described in detail in 
[Franklin et al. 2016, McCall et al. 2020]. LIDA's advantage is related to the ability 
to process both symbolic and numerical knowledge (a slipnet allows the represen-
tation of such kinds of knowledge). This form of knowledge representation is ben-
eficial in the areas of management and economics [17]. However, the disadvantage 
of LIDA is its complexity when processing large amounts of knowledge. Moreover, 
it entails high resource consumption. Therefore, we propose extending the LIDA 
architecture with a machine learning module, making it possible to process faster 
numerical knowledge (which cannot be represented as a slipnet, e.g. knowledge re-
lated to the prediction of costs, or the number of students). The extension is pre-
sented in Fig 3.  
The machine learning module is connected to episodic memory (this memory 
stores data related to past events) and workspace memory. Input data for the ma-
chine learning module is required from the historical data and workspace memory. 
Machine learning module consists of 2 units: 
 
Experimental platform, 
 
Operational platform. 
The experimental platform is the first unit, where ideas for Machine learning 
analyses are examined. Models are created, tested, validated and if necessary, tuned 
to archive better results. After a technical perspective of a model is verified, the 
business attractiveness of results is also evaluated. Positively verified models are 
documented, virtualized and deployed to the operational platform, where then return 

11 
on a regular basis and generate results. The operational platform is also monitored, 
and it is checked if results accuracy does not drop below defined thresholds. If such 
a situation happens, the experimental platform is employed, and the model is again 
verified, tuned and in a corrected version again deployed to the operational plat-
form.   
The results are sent to the workspace memory. The results (e.g. predictions) are 
taken into consideration in forming a current situational model in the global work-
space,  which influences action selection and action forming. 
 
 
 
Fig 3. The extended architecture of LIDA. 
Next, the set of alternative decisions is presented to the user. Each of decision 
has the level of confidence. Also consensus of the set of decisions is calculated [15]. 

12  
Conclusions 
Universities try to develop following the strategies they adopted, which will en-
able long-term activities plans. The university management must constantly analyze 
the information coming from available databases pertaining to many areas and its 
surrounding environment. This article presents a concept of an intelligent manage-
ment control system for higher education. The essence of this solution is a combi-
nation of an MCS's ideas, the balanced scorecard, and machine learning. The prem-
ise of this system is a controlling-oriented approach to supporting university 
management. The executed operational tasks must serve to implement the adopted 
strategy. The proposed system is expected to involve long-term measurement and 
management in key areas, i.e. to conduct research, providing education to students, 
and cooperating with the socio-economic environment. 
Furthermore, it should support the university's management staff in carrying out 
various types of financial analyses so that the tertiary institution's activity does not 
bring financial losses. The university's MCS is based on the Balanced Scorecard, 
which comprises four perspectives: The Financial Perspective, the Customer Per-
spective, the Internal Process Perspective, and Development Perspective. The Bal-
anced Scorecard is one of the methods used to support knowledge management, 
which is important because the university's employees' knowledge constitutes its 
essential capital. As far as universities are concerned, adaptation to the technologi-
cal change, effective knowledge sharing and communication, operational effi-
ciency, time saved due to knowledge sharing, and the growth and enhancement in 
the collaboration culture are becoming essential elements of knowledge manage-
ment. Especially knowledge sharing allows generating new ideas, improving organ-
izational performance, and helping employees to stay motivated. The Balanced 
Scorecard makes it possible to generate various reports for the university manage-
ment with a focus on four perspectives.   
The proposed concept of an intelligent control system requires an appropriate IT 
system architecture. A basis is a typical approach applied in Business Intelligence 
class IT systems, i.e. the transformation of data in various heterogeneous databases 
into information and knowledge for the management staff. There are many data-
bases within the university (mentioned in the previous section) from which the nec-
essary data will be obtained and loaded into a data warehouse after using ETL tools 
(initial concepts addressed to educational/customer area was proposed in [18]). Ag-
gregate data located in a data warehouse is the primary resource for an Intelligent 
Management Control System for Higher Education. The use of the Learning Intel-
ligent Distribution Agent Architecture and the machine learning module application 
are important elements of the proposed system. The use of these elements makes 
our proposal different from a typical Business Intelligence class system,   
The proposed Intelligent Management Control System for Higher Education, ap-
plying four perspectives following the Balanced Scorecard and machine learning, 
allows the development of scenarios for future decisions that can be generated to 

13 
ensure the adopted development strategy's execution. Scenarios may concern the 
processing of information from databases existing at the university. They may also 
include data and information from the university's environment, i.e. the demo-
graphic situation, changes in legal regulations, the demand for graduates with new 
qualifications, and competitive entities' activity. 
Acknowledgement. The project is financed by the Ministry of Science and 
Higher Education in Poland under the programme "Regional Initiative of Excel-
lence" 2019 - 2022 project number 015/RID/2018/19 total funding amount 10 721 
040,00 PLN.
