Graph-Based Recommendation System Enhanced by Community Detection 
Zeinab Shokrzadeh, Department of Computer Engineering, Urmia Branch, Islamic Azad University, 

Mohammad-Reza Feizi-Derakhshi, Department of Computer Engineering, University of Tabriz, 

Mohammad-Ali Balafar, Department of Computer Engineering, University of Tabriz, Tabriz, Iran. 

Jamshid Bagherzadeh Mohasefi, Department of Computer Engineering, Urmia University, Urmia, 

 
Abstract 
Many researchers have used tag information to improve the performance of recommendation techniques 
in recommender systems. Examining the tags of users will help to get their interests and leads to more 
accuracy in the recommendations.  Since user-defined tags are chosen freely and without any restrictions, 
problems arise in determining their exact meaning and the similarity of tags. However, using thesaurus and 
ontologies to find the meaning of tags is not very efficient due to their free definition by users and the use 
of different languages in many data sets. Therefore, this article uses mathematical and statistical methods 
to determine lexical similarity and co-occurrence tags solution to assign semantic similarity.  On the other 
hand, due to the change of users’ interests over time this article has considered the time of tag assignments 
in co-occurrence tags for determining similarity of tags. Then the graph is created based on similarity of 
tags. For modeling the interests of the users, the communities of tags are determined by using community 
detection methods. So, recommendations based on the communities of tags and similarity between 
resources are done. The performance of the proposed method has been evaluated using two criteria of 
precision and recall through evaluations on two public datasets. The evaluation results show that the 
precision and recall of the proposed method have significantly improved, compared to the other methods. 
According to the experimental results, the criteria of recall and precision have been improved, on average 
by 5% and 7% respectively.  
 
Keywords: Social tagging systems, Recommender systems, Collaborative filtering, Community detection, 
Folksonomy 
1. Introduction 
People face a rapid and huge growth of data in social systems. Although there is a lot of useful 
information in various fields, finding accurate and desirable data is difficult and time-consuming. To 
conquer this problem, recommender systems have been provided. Those systems are software techniques 
and tools that assist users in various decision-making processes. In fact, while users need to find the right 
information, they need a system that supports them. One of the offered solutions in this field is the 
development of recommender systems to provide personalized services according to users’ interests.  
Recommender systems are used in various fields and applications. One of the most popular well-known 
systems implemented is Amazon website, which takes advantage of customers’ purchase behavior, 
attractions, and offers according to the users' interests.  

The overall structure of a recommender system follows a set of phases including collection, learning, 
and recommendation[1][2]. In the first phase, appropriate resources that comprise the relevant information 
of users are selected. Then, a leaner (supervised or unsupervised learning) analyzes the users’ preferences 
and extracts their behavioral patterns. The final phase recommends the entities that are the most similar to 
the users’ interests. It is important to recognize that, within a common core structure of a recommender 
system, there are variations from application to application. Some of the most sophisticated and heavily 
used recommender systems in the industry are Last.fm, YouTube, and Amazon [3]. 
Generally, recommender systems can generate a list of recommendations by these approaches: content-
based filtering, collaborative filtering, hybrid recommender systems and, so on [4]. Based on the existing 
research, the conventional CF1 approaches, which only use user-item rating information to make 
recommendations, are in two major categories: the memory-based CF and model-based CF both of which 
can be used to make recommendations in tagging systems [5]. Memory-based methods make suggestions 
based on the nearest neighbors and model-based recommendation based on the model created by users. In 
recommender systems, another type of system was introduced as tagged or tagging systems. Mathes 
discussed the tags on the web in articles in late 2004 [6]. 
Recently, social tagging systems have become an important instrument of Web 2.0 that allows users to 
collaboratively annotate and search the content [7] [8]. To facilitate this process, the present research has 
attempted to improve the performance and quality of resource recommendations. Despite the creation of 
new opportunities, social tagging recommender systems, revive old problems such as information overload. 
Recommender systems good applications in making available the information that is related to the users' 
interests. However, we face new challenges in tagging recommender systems.  
In these systems, users are interested in finding tags, contents and even other users. Furthermore, while 
traditional recommender systems typically work with 2D data arrays, the data in these systems act as a 
third-order tensor or a multilayer graph with user nodes, resources, and tags which have been introduced as 
new aspects of recommendations such as users, resources and introduced the tags. Therefore, new 
approaches and algorithms were needed to address the threefold nature of the data in these systems. Various 
social tagging systems such as Del.icio.us, Last.Fm, CiteULike, Flickr, and others allow users to assign 
custom tags for resources based on their background knowledge to manage, organize, share, discover and 
retrieve resources [9]. These systems aggregate the information of heterogeneous elements to have enriched 
information.  The role of tags in the systems is essential [10].  
Collaborative tagging systems, also known as folksonomy, have grown dramatically on the Web. Tags 
in these systems significantly organize the content of websites and other resources and effectively display 
user behavior. This is considered an advantage for these systems. Tags are also used as a bridge between 
users and resources to describe users' interest in resources [11]. Researchers use a variety of strategies to 
gain the users’ interests and make recommendations with greater accuracy. In fact, one of the most 
important concerns in the field of recommender systems is to provide more accurate recommendations 
according to the users' interests.  
This article focuses on one of the major challenges of recommender systems, which is to improve the 
performance of recommender algorithms. To improve the performance, it has relied on modeling user’ 
interests and tagging clustering based on user tagging behaviors. Clustering and providing more accurate 
analysis we have used the community detection method. This is considered an important achievement. In 
fact, by examining the tagging behaviors of users more closely, using the suggested similarity criteria, 
forming a graph, and using the community detection method, we have paved the way to obtain users' 
interests and finally, we have increased the strength of the recommendations with the nearest neighborhood 
method. 
Tagging activities in folksonomies are not guided by any formal regulations (no dictionaries, no 
thesaurus) meaning that users can tag resources with any tags they like [12]. This leads to a wide variety of 
tags like inflections, spelling errors, abbreviations creative use of compounding, and etc. We can interpret 
the tags in the folksonomy as concepts [13]. As a result, in tagging-based recommender systems, the main 
 
1 Collaborative Filtering 

problems arise from discovering the meanings of tags. Due to the ambiguity in the meanings of the tags and 
lack of correct discovery of their meanings, the performance of these systems is affected. The co-occurrence 
tag method has been used for semantic communication in most previous studies. The number of studies, 
ontologies or external knowledge have been used to strengthen this method. In semantic theory, in order to 
find the relationship of tags based on external knowledge, an attempt is made to adapt them with meaning. 
In [14] they have tried WordNet concepts for deriving relationships. However, WordNet is a static resource, 
and only less than half (48.7%) of tags can match the direct study in [10] and described a domain ontology 
development approach that extracts domain terms from folksonomies and enrich them with data and 
vocabularies from the Linked Open Data cloud. As a result, this article obtains lightweight domain 
ontologies that combine the emergent knowledge of social tagging systems with formal knowledge from 
ontologies [15]. In general, it is difficult to choose the right concept that matches the tag due to the lack of 
tagging context. This is because the process of tagging users is very different from the lexicologists or 
domain specialists. This problem of separating the concept of tag is discussed in [15] [16]. Even if a tag 
can be lexically consistent with a concept in external sources, the conformity of their intended meanings is 
unclear [17]. 
In this work, we presented a new method of collaborative filtering resource recommendation systems 
called social collaborative based on community detection with semantic and lexical connections of tags. It 
should be noted that when users employ tags for resources, these tags clearly show their preference and 
interest. By examining the interactions between users and tags, it is possible to understand the semantic 
correlation between resources and users, and also to extract users' interests more accurately than 
recommending systems based on rating. 
The main contribution of this paper can be explained as the following: 
 To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt leveraging semantic and lexical similarity of 
tags at the same time by considering the time of tag assignments parameter to construct graph of 
tags  .These similarities are used to obtain the association strength of the tags. 
 We apply community detection methods for clustering of tags. This leads to precise modeling of 
the interests of the users. 
 This is the first work that used Ellenberg similarity criterion in recommendation phase for resource 
similarity. By using this criterion, in addition to the similarity of the resources, their differences are 
also taken into account. 
 Based on two real-word data sets, we have conducted experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of 
the method. The results show that the proposed method outperform than the state-of-the-art 
recommendation methods achieved higher.  
 This work is different from the previous methods for a number of reasons, because we have not 
used any external linguistic resources such as Word Net or semantic resources (like ontology) and 
this makes the method stronger and covers most of the tags. On the other hand, WordNet or other 
external knowledge is maintained manually by experts and thus remains unchanged in long term. 
In fact, the low coverage of WordNet inevitably leads to the poor performance of the WordNet 
based on tag sense disambiguation methods. On the other hand, as in the previous methods, we 
have used the co-occurrence tag methods by considering the time of tag assignments parameter and 
lexical similarity to strengthen their communication. 
  Another strength of the proposed method is the use of community detection method to analyze 
tags and find appropriate clusters of them. All these are to improve the quality of system 
performance. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 summarizes the work done in this area, Section 
3 deals with the proposed method with subsections for generating tags graph, community detection, and 
Resources Recommendation Stage, Section 4 describes performance evaluation of proposed solution and the 
results of the proposed method and finally, in Section 5, we have presented the conclusions and future works. 

2. Related works 
Nowadays, tag-based recommender algorithms are evolving rapidly. In general, tag-
based recommender systems provide recommends to users by analyzing tags 
assigned to resources. In traditional recommender systems, especially CF, only two-
dimensional data were used based on user resource rating and often with a rating 
resource user matrix, in tagged systems, that is, collaborative tagging, another 
dimension of information, namely, social tags, has been used as a powerful 
mechanism for making more accurate suggestions. 
Although some studies has been perform on tagged recommendation systems, more 
research is still needed since there are many challenges in these systems. Many 
researchers have been trying to come up with solutions for better recommendations 
according to users’ interest. Some of these investigations have been somewhat 
successful, and some have been able to respond under certain conditions. In this 
section, we review some related studies. 
Tso-Sutter et al. [17] used tag information as an additional source along with user 
rating information matrix in a content-based recommender system. In their work, 
they extended the user-item matrix to the user-item-tag matrix and used the Jaccard 
similarity criterion to find neighbors. However, due to the issue of tag quality, their 
proposed content-based method based on memory was not very successful in 
improving performance. Niwa et al. [18] made an effort to recommended web pages 
based on the analysis of tag used and degree of relationship between tags with users. 
However, in this works the accuracy of the recommendations was between 40% and 
60% that was not a good result. The only advantage of their proposed method 
compared to similar methods was the reduction of complexity due to the lack of page 
browsing and the use of tags. Sen et al. [19] used a special tag ranking function to 
obtain user tag preferences. In addition, they used additional information such as 
search history and click streaming, which is difficult to use in real systems compared 
to other methods. 
Some researchers have examined various aspects of tagged systems [11, 20–24]. In 
field of recommendations, the information contained in these systems, has shown its 
significance in recommending resources, tags and users [21]. Goel and Kumar [11], 
the efficiency of tags in organizing the items to be encoded was examined. Article has 
studied the reasons for the effectiveness of social tagging systems [21]. Lamere [22], 
the authors examined the relevance of tags in music information retrieval. Golder and 
Huberman [24], the authors analyzed the structure and pattern of use of social 
tagging systems in Del.icio.us and compared the differences between collaborative 
and taxonomy tags. 
Xu et al. [25] used an algorithm to recommend tags using the collaborative tagging 
information method. Their proposed algorithm considered the tags of a large number 
of users in the target document and tried to minimize the recommended concept 
overlapping tags to increase the level of coverage of small documents. Unfortunately, 

this method did not cover new documents. This is important for us to analyze in terms 
of tags, but we seek to recommend resources, that are different. 
Zhang et al. [26], instead of analyzing tags, the authors used the features of the 
resources being tagged and combined them with the CF method to model user 
interest. This method identified implicit relationships that were absent in the 
traditional CF method. Determining the features of the resources was one of the 
problems that reduced the efficiency of the system. 
Wu et al. [27] proposed the tag2word model based on a content-based method for 
determining the semantic relationships between the tags. Their method was able to 
reinforce the recommendations. It would not have worked properly if the tags had 
been used in the content of the documentation. This problem is obvious because 
many of the tags had been used by users are not in the content of the resources. 
Therefore, this method does not apply to all types of systems. According to the 
authors’ research, the used dataset gives better recommendations when the usage of 
tags in the titles or text of sources is high. This solution was presented in a content-
based method in recommender systems. 
de Gemmis et al. [28] combined semantic analysis of tags with a content-
based approach. They were assisted in analyzing the meaning of the WordNet for 
disambiguation tags. In this approach, they combined the traditional content-
based method with semantic analysis of tags and provided recommendations 
according to user interest. But the proposed method could not also be successful in 
disambiguating of tags. 
Wartena et al. [29] used the idea of distributing co-occurring tags and proposed a tag 
recommendation system. In fact, they combined the CF method with the proposed 
idea. Their method did not succeed compared to the other methods. They proved that 
when the number of tags given to resources by a single user is higher, the proposed 
method works better. 
Usually, if we want to examine the tag-based recommender systems in terms of the 
type of recommendation, these systems are divided into three categories: tag 
suggestions, resource, and user. The type of offering these systems do not really 
matter because all three categories make recommendations based on the tags [30]. 
Ignatov et al. [31] created profiles for radio stations and users from the tags of songs 
they listened to, and used the online release of tags to dynamically update profiles. 
Vall [32] and Su et al. [33] implicitly created tag-based profiles for music 
recommendations. Xie et al. [34] added emotions to user profiles and tagged 
resources. Ignacio et al. [35] proposed a way to extend user profiles and tag-
based resources to build cross-domain recommendations. 
In general, nowadays there are two main approaches in the field of tagged systems, 
which include approaches based on graph and content [36]. In the field of graph-
based solutions, graph analysis methods can be used, which is one of the methods of 
community-based graph analysis. There is also another issue in tagged systems, and 
that is related to the methods of discovering and mapping meaning to the tag. 

In this object, three methods have been proposed: (1) methods based on clustering, 
(2) methods based on ontology, and (3) hybrid methods that combine Techniques 1 
and 2. Ontology-based methods are not suitable for determining the relationship 
between terms. 
To achieve ontology-based sustainable systems, ontology building should be done by 
people having domain knowledge and not just by knowledge experts [37]. This is 
costly and time-consuming and these methods are used in the hope of solving the 
problem of semantic ambiguity when they could not solve the problem [38]. In 
addition, because these methods use external knowledge such as WordNet and Wikis, 
they can’t completely cover the tags used and lead to increased workload without 
complete problem solving. 
In most cluster-based methods, external knowledge sources such as WordNet and 
Wikis are used to determine the semantic relationships of tags as in ontology-
based methods, which have the same problems mentioned in ontology-
based methods in this category of solutions. A study on the Last.Fm dataset found that 
over 50% of the tags used were not covered by WordNet or any other traditional 
lexical resources [24]. Therefore, by examining the existing methods, we came to the 
conclusion that the simple and effective approaches many researchers use in catching 
semantics to folksonomy are based on mathematical and statistical formulas. 
Mathematical and statistical formulas play an important role. The best thing about 
them is that they were clear and unambiguous [39]. Therefore, using statistical and 
mathematical methods, the semantic and lexical relationship of tags can be 
determined. In the proposed solution, we did not use any external semantic sources 
such as ontologies or thesaurus, however we used accurate and formal methods in 
determining the semantic relationships of tags, which strengthen the proposed 
solution for managing a large number of tags in folksonomy. Because mathematical 
and statistical methods have good accuracy for extracting semantic and lexical 
relations of tags, they are suitable to be use in the proposed solution. After 
determining the semantic and lexical relationships of tags, we used an effective 
method in clustering tags called community detection methods. That is also one of the 
solutions in graph-based tagging systems. With community detection methods, more 
accurate analysis of relationships between graph elements can be provided. In 
general, it is possible to make more personalized suggestions in recommending 
systems by using community-based solutions, a good way to analyze networks. Thus, 
the quality of recommendations increases and this is the advantage of our proposed 
solution. 
This work is different from the previous methods for a number of reasons, because 
we have not used any external linguistic resources such as WordNet or semantic 
resources (like ontology) and this makes our method stronger and covers most of the 
tags. On the other hand, WordNet or other external knowledge is maintained 
manually by experts and thus remains unchanged in long term. In fact, the low 
coverage of WordNet inevitably leads to the poor performance of the WordNet based 

on tag sense disambiguation methods. On the other hand, as in the previous methods, 
we have used the co-occurrence tag methods by considering the time of tag-
assignments parameter and lexical similarity to strengthen their communication. 
Another strength of the proposed method is the use of community detection method 
to analyze tags and find appropriate clusters of them. All these are to improve the 
quality of system performance 
3. Proposed method 
In this Section, we examined the users' tagging behaviors that could determine their interest. To achieve 
this aim, we used tags for resources and categorized them, determining users’ interests.  
A social tagging system consists of a set of users (U), a set of tags (T), and a set of resources (R). We 
define these sets as follows:  
U={u1 , u2,…,un}                T={t1 , t2 ,… , tm}                R={r1 , r2 , … , rk} 
where n is the number of users, m is the number of tags, and k represents the number of resources. In these  
systems, a folksonomy is defined as <U, R, T, Y>, where Y is a ternary relation between them, i.e., 𝑦⊆
𝑈× 𝑇× 𝑅 [40]. Although there are various general datasets available for evaluating recommender 
algorithms, we chose Del.icio.us dataset to evaluate the work. Because the proposed method does not use 
any external thesaurus or ontologies, it supports other languages than English, so it is suitable for evaluating. 
 The proposed approach consists of two main phases. The first phase includes two steps:1) creating a 
graph of tags and 2) identifying communities of tags. The second phase is to make recommendation based 
on the communities created from the tags and available resources in each community. In the following, we 
will explain the phases of the proposed solution. 
3.1. Generating tags graph  
As it was previously explained, the proposed solution includes two phases. The first phase includes two 
stages, the first which is the formation of tag graphs. Graph nodes of tags, and the weight of its edges are 
determined by the amounts of lexical, semantic similarity and the time of tag assignment. For example: the 
weight of two tags, ti and tj, is shown with w (ti, tj). After generating the graph, in the second stage, the tag 
communities are identified. In other words, the basis of this work is detecting communities of user tags and 
building communities of resources based on them. For each community of tags, a community of relevant 
resources and users are created. Finally, resource suggestions are recommended for the target user based 
on the probability of membership of each resource to the communities and the power of the local 
neighborhood. In fact, with this new method, it is possible to identify the interest of users accurately and 
provide precise recommendations. To create a graph, in the first phase, for determining the relationship 
between the tags, use their semantic and lexical similarity and the time of tag assignment. In fact, the first 
innovation of the proposed method is to determine the relationship of tags by a combination of semantic 
(considering the time of tag assignment) and lexical similarity and not by using foreign linguistic or 
semantic sources. As regards, social tags are very beneficial, but due to the nature of free-form tagging and 
the lack of explicit meaning in social tagging systems, there are many obstacles that may prevent the useful 
application of social tags [7].  
One of the obstacles is syntactic variations. This means a word in different syntactic forms may be used in 
different tags. For example, one user may annotate a web resource with the tag "picture," while another 
user may do this work with the tag "pictures." (Other examples are "web," "web20," "acm", "acmi", "acma", 
and so on.) Sometimes, words with the same meaning but very close syntax from different languages are 
used (e.g., "centre" and "center," "absurd" and "absurde"). These changes must be considered to provide 
satisfactory performance; otherwise, they may lead to confusion [7]. These are the reasons that motivated 
the use of lexical similarity. Semantic and lexical similarities are used to obtain weights assigned to graph 
nodes (tags) and to show the strength between nodes. This will result in accurate clustering of tags. In 
addition, this approach can manage a large part of tags in this way. To obtain semantic relevance, the 

property of co-occurrence tags is used. However, unlike the previous methods, it takes into account the fact 
that users' interests change over time. 
As a result, when using the co-occurrence tags, it added the time of tag assignment parameter. If the two 
co-occurrence tags are close to each other in the parameter, they will have a higher score and therefore, the 
power of semantic correlation will be higher. Jaccard similarity is used to find similarity of co-occurred 
tags. The formula is defined as follow: 
 
𝑠𝑖𝑚௃௔௖൫𝑡௜, 𝑡௝൯=
หୖ(୲౟)⋂ୖ(୲ౠ)ห
|ୖ(୲೔)∪ୖ(௧ೕ)|                
(1) 
where R(ti) stands for the set of resources tagged by the ti tag. When two tags co-occur, first their semantic 
similarity is calculated with the Jaccard similarity formula. Then the lexical similarity with Levenshtein 
distance is calculated and called simLev. For calculating lexical relevance and morphological tags, we used 
high-threshold simLev criterion. This can resolve minor morphological changes as well as misspellings 
(these are two common problems with social tagging systems). Moreover, for tags that do not have semantic 
relevance but they have a strong lexical similarity, this lexical similarity is considered as the weights of the 
edges. The formula for simLev is defined as follow: 
(2) 
𝑠𝑖𝑚௅௘௩= 1 −𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑠ℎ𝑡𝑒𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒(𝑡௜, 𝑡௝)
𝑚𝑎𝑥𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑔𝑡ℎ(𝑡௜, 𝑡௝)
 
After obtaining both similarities, each lexical or semantic similarity that is larger, selected as the similarity 
between two tags. If two tags do not co-occur and the lexical similarity is greater than a threshold value of 
α, then the value is selected as a similarity between two tags. Since the users’ interests change over time, 
we considered another similarity based on the time of tag assignments for co-occurred tags. This similarity 
is shown with simtime(ti,tj). Suppose that Timestamp(tj , rk) shows the last  time the tag ti is assigned to the 
resource rk.. The set of the common resources for two co-occurred tags ti and tj , whose assignment is too 
close, is shown by nco(ti,tj). The formulas of 𝑛𝑐𝑜൫𝑡௜, 𝑡௝൯  and simtime(ti,tj) can be defined as follows: 
 
nco൫𝑡௜, 𝑡௝൯= {r௞|r௞∈R(t௜) ⋀r௞∈R(t௝) ⋀หTimestamp(t௜, r௞) −Timestamp൫t௝, r௞൯ห≤𝜏} 
(3) 
𝑠𝑖𝑚௧௜௠௘൫𝑡௜, 𝑡௝൯=
|#௡௖௢൫௧೔,௧ೕ൯|
|ୖ(୲೔)⋂ୖ(୲ೕ)| 
 
  
        (4) 
Therefore, simtime is considered when two tags are co-occurred. Finally, a graph of the tags is created and 
the weight between two desired nodes calculated by Eq. 5.  
 
𝑤(൫𝑡௜, 𝑡௝൯
=
⎩⎪⎨
⎪⎧𝜆× 𝑠𝑖𝑚௝௔௖൫𝑡௜, 𝑡௝൯+ (1 −𝜆) 𝑠𝑖𝑚௧௜௠௘             
𝑖𝑓  𝑡௜   𝑐𝑜−𝑜𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑑 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑡௝   𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑠𝑖𝑚௝௔௖> 𝑠𝑖𝑚௟௘௩  
𝜆× 𝑠𝑖𝑚௟௘௩൫𝑡௜, 𝑡௝൯+ (1 −𝜆) 𝑠𝑖𝑚௧௜௠௘
         𝑖𝑓 𝑡௜     𝑐𝑜−𝑜𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑑 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑡௝ 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑠𝑖𝑚௝௔௖< 𝑠𝑖𝑚௟௘௩   
𝜆× 𝑠𝑖𝑚௟௘௩                                                              
        𝑖𝑓  𝑡௜   𝑛𝑜𝑡 𝑐𝑜𝑜𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑑 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑡௝   𝑎𝑛𝑑  𝑠𝑖𝑚௟௘௩> 𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑
0                                                                     
𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒                                                           
 
 
The pseudocode for generating the graph of tags is shown in Algorithm 1. 
Algorithm 1: Generating the Graph of tags 
G= GenGraph(T) 
Input: T: The set of tags of dataset  
Output: G= (V, E), V are nodes and E are weighted edges in G 
 V={} 
(5)

 E={} 
 for each ti∈ T do 
      for each tj∈ T do 
           Calculate w(ti,tj) according to Eq. 5  
           Add ti , tj to V if not exist. 
           Add an edge between ti and tj with weight w(ti,tj ) to E 
       end for 
   end for 
 
After generating a graph of tags, their communities are determined. In the following, the community 
detection algorithms and the reasons for using them in the proposed method will be explained. 
3.2. Community detection  
The scope of social networks is known as a significant evolution in the last decade, and community 
detection has emerged to analyze many fields as well as the individual’s interactions within social 
environments [41]. In this work, it has been decided to use this method to analyze tags. Therefore, the 
second stage of the first phase of the proposed approach is to detect tag communities. The best way to 
analyze the network of tags and to cluster them, is to use community detection methods. The purpose of 
detecting communities is to extract groups whose internal communications of their communities are 
stronger and more powerful than external communications. In fact, with this method, the existing divisions 
in a network can be identified and separated to get a better view of the structure of a network for its analysis. 
Various methods have been proposed for community detection. Here, community means a group of network 
nodes of tags that are tightly connected. The strength of the joints is obtained through their degree of 
similarity. In other words, the strength of the power connections shows the semantic and lexical similarity. 
In fact, the nodes belonging to the same community are similar and related to the same interest. The better 
the identified communities, the more accurate results are obtained in the recommendation section of the 
research system. Here, the criterion for distinguishing a good community is modularity, which is widely 
used in community detection methods. Modularity is defined based on [42] in Eq. 6. 
 
𝑄= 1
2𝑚෍ቆ𝑤(𝑡௜, 𝑡௝) −
𝐾௧೔𝐾௧ೕ
2𝑚ቇ𝛿ቀ𝐶𝑚௧೔, 𝐶𝑚௧ೕቁ
௜௝
 
(6)
 
𝐾௧೔= ෍𝑤(𝑡௜, 𝑡௞)
௞
 
(7) 
 
  𝑚=
ଵ
ଶ∑𝑤(𝑡௜, 𝑡௝)
௜௝
 
(8) 
Where w(ti,tj) is the weight of two nodes ti and tj. In the following 𝐾௧೔ is the degree of node ti defined in Eq. 
7. Also, 𝛿ቀ𝐶𝑚௧೔, 𝐶𝑚௧ೕቁ has a value of 1 if both nodes ti and tj belong to the same community; otherwise, 
its value is zero. In Eq. 6, m is the total weights of all edges in this graph, defined in Eq.8. In this research, 
the Louvain method has been used to identify the tags community. This method is non-overlapping. After 
this step, the next part, which is the presentation of resource recommendation stage, will be explained. 
 
 3.3. Resources recommendation stage 
In this Section, after identifying the communities, the recommendation steps are explained. First C is 
defined as a set of communities which is detected by the community detection algorithm. Each community 
is a set of tags. These are defined in Eq.9 and Eq. 10. 

 
𝐶= {c௜| c୧is a community }
 
(9) 
 
c୧= {t୩| t୩∈T , θ(𝑡௞) = i } 
(10) 
 
where θ stands for a function determining the community number of tags. In the following, for each 
resource a probability value is calculated for each community that indicates the probability of that resource's 
membership in the desired community of tags which can be defined by Eq. 11. 
𝑃𝑟൫r௜, 𝑐௝൯=
𝑁൫𝑟௜, 𝑐௝൯
∑
𝑁൫𝑟௜, 𝑐௝൯
௖ೕ∈஼
 
(11) 
 
𝑁൫r௜, 𝑐௝൯= ෍𝑁൫𝑡௞, r௜, 𝑐௝൯
୲ೖ∈௖ೕ
 
(12) 
 
In Eq. 12, N(tk, ri, cj) is the number of tags are used in the community cj to be tagged the resource ri, where 
it is possible to determine which communities are related to the resource. The higher the probability, the 
more relevant the resource is to that community. In other words, more tags from a community are used to 
tag the resource. In fact, by examining a user's resources, it is possible to determine the user’s interests in 
various communities.  
In this research, it was determined experimentally that the overlap of resource communities is high. The 
creation of resource communities through tag communities causes this high percentage. Due to the reduced 
accuracy of the recommendations. Therefore, at this stage, the resource communities are refined. According 
to Eq. 11, the probability value a resource to a desired community is obtained, which we can consider 
threshold value. Therefore, resources that are less than threshold dependent are excluded from that 
community. In this way, the resulting communities will be more reasonable. 
After determining the resources’ membership for different communities, in the next step, by Eq. 13, 
which is the Ellenberg similarity criterion, the degree of similarity between two resources ri and rj is 
obtained. 
 
Sime(ri,rj)=
௠/ଶ
௠/ଶା௕ା௖ 
 
 
(13) 
where m is the sum of the probabilities of membership the two resources ri and rj in the common 
communities. b indicates the probability of membership the resource ri and c represents the probability of 
membership the resource rj in different communities. By calculating the similarity between resources of the 
target user and resources of the specified communities of the target user, a list of recommended candidate 
resources can be obtained. More formally, let RTU and RTC be the set of the target user resources and 
resources of the target user communities. This list has two problems. The first problem is that there are too 
many resources in this list that have the same amount of similarity to the resources of the target user, and it 
is difficult to choose the exact resources recommended and close to the user's interest. The second problem 
is that there are many unrelated resources to a reasonable degree of similarity in this list,  if numerical 
similarity is sufficient, the expected result will not be obtained. To solve this problem, the other similarity 
has been used between two resources by Eq.14.  
 
Simu(ri,rj)=|(U(ri) ⋂U(rj))| / max{|U(ri)| , |U(rj)|}         
(14) 
 
U(ri) stands for the set of users that annotated ri with tags. Then by Eq. 15, resources with the most similarity 
to the resources of the target user are calculated. 
 

Msr(ri)=
{ Sim୳(𝑟௜, 𝑟௝) + Sim௘(𝑟௜, r௝) }
௥೔
௔௥௚௠௔௫
                
(15) 
where ri is the resource of the target user (ri∈ RTU) and rj is the resource of the target community (rj∈RTC). 
Finally, a list of recommended resources is obtained by Eq. 16. 
 
Recommend list ={Msr(ri) | ri ∈ RTU}                       
(16) 
The pseudocode for generating the recommended list is shown in Algorithm 2. 
 
Algorithm 2: generating the recommended list  
R_List = Generate_recommended_list (n_com, RTU, RTC, C) 
Input: n-com =number of communities, RTU:set of the target user resources,  
RTC: set of resources of the target communities, C={ci|ci is community of the target user} 
Output:  R_List: list of recommended resources for the target user. 
 L= {} 
 R_List= {} 
 for each ri ∈ RTC 
     for each cj ∈ C  
         calculate 𝑃𝑟൫r௜ , 𝑐௝
 ൯ according to Eq.11 and Eq. 12 
         if  (𝑃𝑟൫r௜ , 𝑐௝
 ൯≠0) then 
              A(i,j)= 𝑃𝑟൫r௜ , 𝑐௝
 ൯ 
      end for 
   end for 
  for each ri∈ RTU  
        for each rj∈ RTC 
           m=0; b=0; c=0; 
         for each k∈ n_com 
            if (A(i, k) ≠ 0 And A(j, k) ≠ 0) then m=m+ 𝐴(𝑖, 𝑘) + 𝐴(𝑗, 𝑘) 
                  else if (A(i, k) ≠ 0) then  b=b+ 𝐴(𝑖, 𝑘) 
            else  c=c+ 𝐴(𝑗, 𝑘)              
               Sime(ri,rj)=
௠/ଶ
௠/ଶା௕ା௖ 
          calculate Simu(ri,rj) according to Eq.14 
          append(L,  ri , ri  , Simu(ri,rj)+ Sime(ri,rj)) 
       end for  
     end for 
   end for 
        calculate  Msr(ri)  from L according to Eq. 15 
         append(R_List , Msr(ri)) 
    return (R_List) 
 
4. Performance evaluation of proposed solution 
4.1. Experimental dataset 
One of the main parts of each recommendation system is the collection of information. If it were done in a 
regular and accurate manner, the analysis of data will be accomplished with great speed and accuracy [43]. 
In the proposed method, among the valid datasets that have been published, two datasets were used.  

1) Del.icio.us: the highly used Hetrec2011-Del.icio.us-2k dataset by Zuo rt al. [44]and Xu et al. [45] 
in the experiments, which includes 53,388 tags, 1867 users, and 69,226 sources, which are gathered 
from Del.icio.us.com and released in [46]. In this dataset, users not only can save and organize their 
favorite pages (URLs) but also tag and share them as they wish. Users are connected in a social 
network created from Del.icio.us interactions, and each user has its own tags, bookmarks and tag 
assignments.  
2) Last.Fm: this is an artist recommendation dataset and gathered from music system Last.Fm2, which 
users are able to tag artists. Therefore, each user to artists has a list of tag assignments [47]. This 
dataset includes 11946 tags, 1892 users and 17632 artists. 
In the beginning of using these datasets, we first removed the noisy and meaningless tags. Since there are 
some special characters and numbers in the dataset, these tags are noisy and meaningless. In the beginning 
of using the dataset, these tags have been removed and the data set has been cleaned. Python scripts have 
been used to perform the cleaning dataset. 
Unlike most previous methods, the tags are used with any number of repetitions in this work. Therefore, 
the proposed solution is responsive to the cold start problem. Then, the test and trained dataset are specified 
as 20% and 80% of the total data. Recommendations are generated based on the known information in the 
training set, and then the test set is used to evaluate the performance of recommendation algorithms 
 
4.2. Experimental parameters and baseline methods 
In the first step of the proposed method, which is generating a graph tags, a graph of all user tags was 
created. In creating this graph, Jaccard similarity and Levenshtein distance was used to determine the edge 
weight between two tags for co-occurring tags. In order to consider the lexical connection between them, 
Levenshtein distance was used and the greatest similarity was selected. If two tags co-occur, also the time 
of tag assignments are considered. For tags that do not co-occur, the lexical similarity (simLev) to α threshold 
is supposed. Here, in various experiments, we experimentally considered the lexical similarity threshold, α 
equal to 0.7 for co-occur tags; otherwise, its value is 0.8. If the lexical similarity were greater than this 
threshold, it calculated as 50% and applied as weight. 
To show the efficiency of the proposed method, this method is compared with the following models:  
1) CCS3 method: The Cosine similarity method is based on clustering. Hierarchical clustering [48] was 
used to model users and resources as a vector of cluster-based attributes, and content-based filtering is based 
on cosine similarity of recommendations. The proposed method is better than this method for several 
reasons. First, use the tags graph and create this graph in a powerful way. Secondly, the use of robust graph 
analysis, which is a method of community detection. The results of these two methods show the superiority 
of this research method.  
2) ACF4 method: uses the CF method based on automatic encoder. An automated encoder is usually used 
to obtain summary introductions from user profiles based in which CF recommendations are used. 
Experiments on CF method with different number of hidden layers demonstrate that deeper architectures 
can work better if the depth of the neural network is set appropriately [45]. 
3) CCF5 method or CF based on clustering: It is similar to CCS method but here the user-based CF method 
is used for recommendations [49].  
4) PMF6 method: This technique, which is based on filtering user collaboration, uses a user ranking matrix. 
This model, based on the assumption that users who have rated similar sets of items are likely to have 
similar preferences [50]. The method was chosen to demonstrate the superiority of using another dimension 
of information, namely tags. 
 
2 2http://www.last.fm.com 
3 Clustering-based Cosine similarity 
4 Autoencoder-based collaborative filtering 
5 Clustering-based collaborative filtering 
6 Probabilistic Matrix Factorization 

These two criteria have been significantly improved in the proposed algorithm, according to the known 
algorithms. The results of comparing the presented method with the proposed and known methods are 
shown in Table 1.  
5) KGAT: this is state-of-the-art knowledge-based model, performs knowledge-aware attentive graph 
convolution in KG for high-order modeling of relation [51]. 
  
4.3. Evaluation metrics  
The criteria most often used to evaluate recommender systems are Precession (P), Recall (R) and all of 
which used to evaluate the quality performance of recommendation systems. In fact, the criterion of 
Precession(P) determines what percentage of the set of recommenders is presented by a method is correct. 
This criterion measures the correctness and accuracy of the proposals recommended, as a result, the larger 
the criterion, the less errors in the method being measured. The next criterion, which is Recall(R), refers to 
what percentage of the offers are really users’ interest. According to [26], P and R, are defined in Eq. 17 
and Eq. 18. Since users usually review the highest recommended items, we cut these criteria to a specific 
rank k.  That is, just considering k the number of results at the top of the recommendation list, the precession 

𝑃= |𝑟𝑟∩𝑡𝑟|
|𝑟𝑟|
 
(17) 
𝑅= |𝑟𝑟∩𝑡𝑟|
|𝑡𝑟|
 
(18) 

recommended by users. Where rr is the list of recommended resources and tr is the list of resources being 
tested. The higher value of these two criteria in different methods indicates their better quality.   All 
experiments are implemented an Intel(R) Core i7 computer with 2.67 GHz CPU and 16.00 GB of RAM.  
 
4.4. Experimental results and analysis 
Two research questions have been raised in this section, and the experiments were designed to address these 
questions. 
RQ1: How effective is the lexical similarity in the proposed method? To answer this RQ1, the proposed 
method has been compared with lexical similarity which is shown as LEXSEM_CDR. The method without 

show that lexical similarity enhances system performance by using semantic similarity. This improvement 
in output is especially evident when there are spelling mistakes in the tags. In these experiments, we 
experimentally considered the threshold value to be 0.7 for co-occur tags; otherwise, its value is 0.8. 
Because in assigning tags to resources, spelling mistakes are obvious, instead of spending time to clean 
them, using lexical similarity seemed very useful. 
 
Table 1: Recommendation Performance on Del.icio.us dataset for two Proposal Models (in %) 
Models 

LEXSEM_CDR
24.08
22.80
21.70
20.73
8.11
14.60
18.84
25.54
SEM__CDR
24.02
22.67
21.52
20.07
8.06
14.03
18.44
25.32
 
Table 2: Recommendation Performance on Last.Fm dataset for two Proposal Models (in %) 
Models 

LEXSEM_CDR
17.09
16.60
15.40
12.80
7.45
8.89
10.89
12.66
SEM__CDR
16.95
16.59
15.40
12.80
7.32
8.89
10.86
12.66
 
Tables 1, 2 show the results that “Del.icio.us  " dataset performs well compared to “Last.Fm” due to the 
diversity in tags by applying two similarities. 
In the following, the second question will be raised.  
RQ2: How effective is the time of tag assignment in the proposed methods? Due to the changes in users’ 
interests over time, we have considered the time difference of the last assignment of two co-occurred tags 
to generate a graph. Tables 3,4 present the results of the proposed method (CDR_TIME) and its comparison 
with LEXSEM_CDR. The results show that using the time of tag assignment approved accuracy of the 
recommender system. 
 
Table 3 : Recommendation Performance on Del.icio.us dataset for two Proposal Models (in %) 
Models 

LEXSEM_CDR
24.08
22.80
21.70
20.73
8.11
14.60
18.84
25.54
CDR_TIME
24.23
22.98
21.87
20.89
8.43
14.84
19.21
25.96
 
Table 4: Recommendation Performance on Last.Fm dataset for two Proposal Models (in %) 
Models 

LEXSEM_CDR
17.09
16.60
15.40
12.80
7.45
8.89
10.89
12.66
CDR_TIME
18.18
17.26
17.96
15.98
7.98
13.001
13.21
14.18
 
In “Last.Fm” dataset, users’ tastes vary over time, so by applying the time parameter, compared to dataset 
" Del.icio.us  " , the results change noticeably. 
The results in tables 5,6 show that the proposed method has significantly improved the two criteria of 
precision and recall. In addition to the improved results, the great advantage of the proposed method is that 
it uses only training data and does not use any external knowledge base or resource contents. The proposed 
method is agile and simple. As it is explained in the previous sections, tags do not have a specific format 
and users choose them without restrictions and this was the main reason for not using an external 
knowledge. 
On the other hand, the reason why KGAT works more accurately with the increase in the number of 
recommendations is that, the latent relations are better extracted in this method. At the same time, the 
simplicity of the proposed method is considered an advantage over the KGAT method. 
 
 
Table 5: Comparisons of Performance on Del.icio.us dataset for different models (in %) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Models
 
1.803
1.499
1.051
0.439
0.454
0.597
0.757
0.913
CCF 
2.364
 
1.917
 
1.209
 
0.590
 
0.595
 
0.736
 
0.909
 
1.120
 
ACF 
 

4.774
 
3.774
 
2.271
 
0.938
 
1.273
 
1.564
 
1.903
 
2.397
 
CCS 
 
7.587
 
4.988
 
2.851
 
1.302
 
6.306
 
6.784
 
7.467
 
9.157
 
PMF
 
37.86
27.98
19.18
8.13
18.02
19.80
21.18
24.03
KGAT
37.45
 
27.92
 
19.21
 
8.43
 
17.80
 
19.75
 
21.87
 
24.23
 
CDR(proposed)
 
 
Table 6: Comparisons of Performance on Last,Fm dataset for different models (in %) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Models
 
1.803
1.499
1.051
0.439
0.668
0.765
0.987
1.004
CCF 
2.364
 
1.917
 
1.209
 
0.590
 
0.702
 
0.845
 
1.004
 
1.820
 
ACF 
 
33.96
 
24.13
 
16.25
 
7.54
 
15.13
 
16.95
 
17.98
 
18.08
 
KGAT
 
19.75
 
14.95
 
13.21
 
7.98
 
12.65
 
14.65
 
17.96
 
18.18
  
CDR(proposed)
 
 
 
 
4.6. Threats to validity 
In this section, a brief list of internal and external threats related to the validity of research findings after 
various reviews is provided. The internal threats to the validity of the findings this research: The accuracy 
of the proposed method depends on quality of input dataset. In this work, after removing the noisy and 
meaningless data, all the data are divided into training and test data and the proposed method has been 
applied to it. By examining the results obtained on two datasets and comparing them with the state-of-the-
art methods, it was concluded that this method has worked well. The values of the parameters used in 
the calculation of the similarity of the tags have been tried to select the best value by performing 
various tests, and the results of some of them have been randomly selected and checked manually. 
This review has confirmed the correctness of choosing the appropriate values. 
The external threats to the validity of the findings this research: The ability to generalize the algorithm 
is one of the external threats. Therefore, the proposed method has been tested on two datasets. The results 
in both datasets confirm the superiority of this method. As a result, this method can be used in similar 
datasets without problems. The algorithm's performance may depend on the quality and size of the dataset 
used to train and test the algorithm. If the dataset is biased or not representative, the resulting may not 
accurately reflect the relationships between tags, users, and resources. And this will affect the accuracy of 
the recommendation system. As usual, here the data is selected as 80% and 20% for training and testing, 
respectively. Tag usage behavior may change over time or in response to different situations, which 
may affect the accuracy of the resulting. To deal with this threat in the proposed method, we used 
the time parameter to consider the user's behavioral changes during different times. The datasets 
used are static and their dynamicity needs further investigation, which was not specifically 
investigated in this research. 
 
5. Conclusion and future works 
In the method, the problems in tagged recommender systems and concluded that the performance of 
these systems is affected by semantic and lexical ambiguities. Various solutions have been proposed in this 
field, most of which suggested the use of external knowledge and thesaurus. Because the use of tags in 
some cases does not follow any specific rules, these solutions were not suitable especially in datasets such 
as Del.icio.us, where most tags are not covered by thesaurus. Therefore, by using co-occurring tags, the 
time of tag assignment and statistical and mathematical methods, we identified the semantic and lexical 

similarity of more accurate communications. The proposed method reached a suitable modeling of users' 
interest from the community detection method. Based on this accurate modeling it achieved better results 
in providing recommendations. The results of experimental examinations also confirmed this. The 
performance of the proposed method has been done using two criteria of precision and recall based on 
evaluations with “Del.icio.us” and “Last.Fm” dataset. The evaluation results show that the precision and 
recall of the proposed method have significantly improved, compared to the other methods. According to 
the experimental results, the criteria of recall and precision have been improved, on average by 5% and 7% 
respectively. In later studies, we plan to use more advanced community detection methods to cluster tags 
and get more accurate results and also will provide a plan to eliminate the semantic ambiguity of the tags.
