arXiv:2001.00819v3  [cs.LO]  11 Mar 2020
Bounds on the size of PC and URC
formulas
Petr Kuˇcera∗
Petr Savick´y†
In this paper we investigate CNF formulas, for which the unit propagation
is strong enough to derive a contradiction if the formula together with a
partial assignment of the variables is unsatisﬁable (unit refutation complete
or URC formulas) or additionally to derive all implied literals if the formula
is satisﬁable (propagation complete or PC formulas). If a formula represents
a function using existentially quantiﬁed auxiliary variables, it is called an
encoding of the function. We prove several results on the sizes of PC and
URC formulas and encodings. One of them are separations between the sizes
of formulas of diﬀerent types. Namely, we prove an exponential separation
between the size of URC formulas and PC formulas and between the size of
PC encodings using auxiliary variables and URC formulas. Besides of this,
we prove that the sizes of any two irredundant PC formulas for the same
function diﬀer at most by a factor polynomial in the number of the variables
and present an example of a function demonstrating that a similar statement
is not true for URC formulas. One of the separations above implies that a
q-Horn formula may require an exponential number of additional clauses to
become a URC formula. On the other hand, for every q-Horn formula, we
present a polynomial size URC encoding of the same function using auxiliary
variables. This encoding is not q-Horn in general.
1 Introduction
Since unit propagation is a basic procedure used in DPLL based SAT solvers includ-
ing CDCL solvers, it has become a common practice to require that unit propagation
maintains at least some level of local consistency in the constraints being encoded into a
conjunctive normal form (CNF) formula. Close connection between unit propagation in
SAT solvers and maintaining generalized arc consistency was investigated for example
∗Department of Theoretical Computer Science and Mathematical Logic, Faculty of Mathematics and

1

in [4]. General CNF formulas do not support even eﬃcient consistency testing, hence,
it is important to understand the properties needed for good propagation. In this pa-
per, we investigate CNF formulas with a high level of propagation strength — they are
unit refutation complete or propagation complete. The class of unit refutation complete
(URC) formulas was introduced in [16] and it consists of formulas whose consistency
with any given partial assignment can be tested by unit propagation.
It was shown
in [18] that the class of URC formulas coincides with the class SLUR (single lookahead
unit resolution) introduced in [27]. The class of propagation complete formulas (PC) was
later introduced in [9]. PC formulas are URC and, moreover, unit propagation derives
all implied literals provided the formula is satisﬁable with a given partial assignment of
its variables.
Every boolean function has a URC and a PC representation. In particular, a canonical
CNF which consists of all prime implicates is always PC and, hence, URC. On the other
hand, it is co-NP complete to check if a formula is URC [13] or PC [3].
Unit propagation is a weak deduction rule, so PC or URC representations of functions
tend to be large. The power of the unit propagation increases when auxiliary variables are
used and in this case, we call the corresponding representations PC or URC encodings.
PC encodings were already used as a target language of knowledge compilation.
In
particular, in [1] a construction of a PC encoding of a function represented with an
ordered decision diagram was described. URC encodings were considered in [8] as an
existential closure of URC formulas.
As one of the results of this paper, we provide a characterization of propagation
complete formulas using speciﬁc Horn functions. This characterization applies also to
encodings provided that the set of the auxiliary variables is ﬁxed. The importance of
the use of auxiliary variables is emphasized by exponential lower bounds for PC and
URC formulas without auxiliary variables for functions that have a polynomial size PC
encodings. Our lower bounds are stronger than previously known similar lower bounds
in that they apply to functions for which a polynomial size CNF representation exists.
Moreover, the functions belong to well-known tractable classes of Horn and q-Horn
formulas [10].
We also show that the sizes of irredundant PC formulas representing the same function
are polynomially related which as we show is not the case of irredundant URC formulas.
The minimum size of a URC representation is always at most the minimum size of a PC
representation, however, although irredundancy is a helpful criterion for PC formulas, it
can be completely misleading for URC ones. This result suggests that the structure of
PC formulas can make it easier to ﬁnd a PC formula of a reasonable size provided such
a formula exists rather than a URC formula.
Section 2 summarizes known notions used in this paper.
A complete summary of
the results is presented in Section 3. The proofs of the results are postponed to the
remaining sections.
In Section 4, we prove exponential lower bounds on the sizes of PC and URC formulas
for speciﬁc functions with a polynomial size CNF representation which additionally
admit a polynomial size PC encoding using auxiliary variables. In Section 5, we prove
that on the contrary to URC formulas, the sizes of irredundant PC formulas representing
2

the same function diﬀer at most by a factor polynomial in the number of the variables.
In Section 6, we present a characterization of PC formulas based on a correspondence
between a speciﬁc variant of the dual rail encoding [5, 7, 8, 12, 20, 25, 26] of a PC formula
and a Horn function capturing semantical closure of the sets of the literals assuming the
given formula. In Section 7, we present a construction of a URC encoding for a general
q-Horn formula of size polynomial in the size of the input formula. In a general case, the
presented encoding is not a q-Horn formula. The paper is closed by formulating several
directions for further research in Section 8.
2 Basic Concepts
In this section, we recall the known concepts we use and introduce the necessary notation.
2.1 URC and PC Formulas
A formula in conjunctive normal form (CNF formula) is a conjunction of clauses. A
clause is a disjunction of a set of literals and a literal is a variable x (positive literal)
or its negation ¬x (negative literal). Given a set of variables x, lit(x) denotes the set
of literals on variables in x. We treat a clause as a set of literals and a CNF formula
as a set of clauses. In particular, |C| denotes the number of literals in a clause C and
|ϕ| denotes the number of clauses in a CNF formula ϕ. We denote ∥ϕ∥= P
C∈ϕ |C| the
length of a CNF formula ϕ.
Clause C is Horn if it contains at most one positive literal, it is deﬁnite Horn, if it
contains exactly one positive literal. A deﬁnite Horn clause ¬x1∨· · ·∨¬xk ∨y represents
the implication x1 ∧· · · ∧xk →y and we use both kinds of notation interchangeably.
The set of variables {x1, . . . , xk} in the assumption of a deﬁnite Horn clause is called its
source set, variable y is called its target.
A partial assignment α of values to variables in z is a subset of lit(z) that does not
contain a complementary pair of literals, so we have |α ∩lit(x)| ≤1 for each x ∈z.
By ϕ(α) we denote the formula obtained from ϕ by the partial setting of the variables
deﬁned by α. We identify a set of literals α (in particular a partial assignment) with the
conjunction of these literals if α is used in a formula such as ϕ(x) ∧α.
We are interested in formulas which have good properties with respect to unit prop-
agation which is a well known procedure in SAT solving [6]. For technical reasons, we
represent unit propagation using unit resolution. The unit resolution rule allows to de-
rive clause C \ {l} given a clause C and a unit clause ¬l. A clause C can be derived
from ϕ by unit resolution, if C can be derived from ϕ by a series of applications of the
unit resolution rule and we denote this fact with ϕ ⊢1 C. The notion of a propagation
complete CNF formula was introduced in [9] as a generalization of a unit refutation
complete CNF formula introduced in [16].
Deﬁnition 2.1. Let ϕ(x) be a CNF formula.
• We say that ϕ is unit refutation complete ( URC) if the following implication holds
3

for every partial assignment α ⊆lit(x)
ϕ(x) ∧α |= ⊥
=⇒
ϕ ∧α ⊢1 ⊥.
(1)
• We say that ϕ is propagation complete ( PC) if for every partial assignment α ⊆
lit(x) and for every l ∈lit(x), such that
ϕ(x) ∧α |= l
(2)
we have
ϕ ∧α ⊢1 l
or
ϕ ∧α ⊢1 ⊥.
(3)
One can verify that a formula ϕ(x) is PC if and only if for every partial assignment
α ⊆lit(x) and for every l ∈lit(x) such that
ϕ(x) ∧α ̸⊢1 ⊥
and
ϕ(x) ∧α ̸⊢1 ¬l
the formula ϕ(x) ∧α ∧l is satisﬁable.
Given a boolean function f(x) on variables x = (x1, . . . , xn), we diﬀerentiate between
CNF formulas which represent f(x) with using only variables x and CNF encodings
which can posibly use existentially quantiﬁed auxiliary variables in addition to the input
variables x. Formally, we deﬁne the CNF encodings as follows.
Deﬁnition 2.2 (Encoding). Let f(x) be a boolean function on variables x = (x1, . . . , xn).
Let ϕ(x, y) be a CNF formula on n + m variables where y = (y1, . . . , ym). We call ϕ a
CNF encoding of f if for every a ∈{0, 1}x we have
f(a) = (∃b ∈{0, 1}y) ϕ(a, b) ,
(4)
where we identify 1 and 0 with logical values true and false. The variables in x and y
are called input variables and auxiliary variables, respectively.
The notions of PC and URC encodings are now deﬁned as follows.
Deﬁnition 2.3. PC encoding and URC encoding is an encoding that is a PC formula
and a URC formula, respectively.
Finally, let us note that given a boolean function f(x), a CNF ϕ(x) which consists
of all prime implicates of f(x) is always PC and also URC, thus every boolean function
has a PC formula which represents it.
2.2 Implicational Dual Rail Encoding
We use the well-known dual rail encoding of partial assignments [7, 12, 20, 25, 26] to
simulate unit propagation in a general CNF formula in the same way as in [8, 5]. Let us
describe a variant of such a simulation suitable for our purposes.
In short, if ϕ is a general CNF formula, then the implicational dual rail encoding
corresponding to ϕ is a Horn formula whose variables correspond to the literals on
4

var(ϕ) and whose clauses represent unit propagation on these literals. In addition, we
include the consistency clauses which are negative clauses enforcing that at most one
literal in each pair of complementary literals on the variables var(ϕ) is satisﬁed.
More precisely, assume, ϕ is a CNF formula on the variables x that does not contain
an empty clause. Let us introduce for every l ∈lit(x) a meta-variable JlK and let us
denote meta(x) the set of all meta-variables. For each pair (C, l), such that l ∈C ∈ϕ,
we express the step of unit propagation deriving l from ¬(C \ {l}) as an implication


^
e∈C\{l}
J¬eK

→JlK
(5)
or an equivalent Horn clause
JlK ∨
_
e∈C\{l}
¬J¬eK .
(6)
The implicational dual rail encoding of ϕ is the following formula on the variables meta(x)
consisting of all the clauses (6) and the consistency clauses, namely
DR(ϕ) =
^
l∈C∈ϕ

JlK ∨
_
e∈C\{l}
¬J¬eK

∧
^
x∈x
(¬JxK ∨¬J¬xK) .
2.3 q-Horn Formulas
The class of q-Horn formulas was introduced in [10] as a generalization of both renamable
Horn formulas and 2-CNF formulas. It is a tractable class which means that satisﬁability
of q-Horn formulas can be tested in polynomial time, this class of formulas is closed
under partial assignment, and we can check if a formula is q-Horn in linear time by
results of [11].
Although Horn formulas are URC, q-Horn formulas are not URC in
general. For example an unsatisﬁable 2-CNF consisting only of binary clauses is q-Horn,
but it is not URC.
Following the characterization of q-Horn formulas described in [11], let us deﬁne these
formulas as follows.
Deﬁnition 2.4 ([10, 11]). Let ϕ be a CNF formula. We say that γ : lit(ϕ) →{0, 1
2, 1}
is a valuation of literals in ϕ if γ(u) + γ(¬u) = 1 for every literal u ∈lit(ϕ). Formula ϕ
is q-Horn if there is a valuation γ of literals in ϕ which satisﬁes for every clause C ∈ϕ
that
X
u∈C
γ(u) ≤1 .
(7)
The value γ(u) is called weight of literal u. If x is a variable, then γ(x) is called the
weight of variable x.
It is easy to observe that any renamable Horn formula is q-Horn, only values 0 and 1
are suﬃcient in a valuation. Also any 2-CNF is q-Horn, just assign 1
2 to every literal.
5

3 Results
In this section, we state the results proven in the paper.
3.1 Separations
Let us ﬁrst recall the notion of succinctness introduced in [17] and used later extensively
in [15].
Deﬁnition 3.1 (Succinctness). Let L1 and L1 be two representation languages. We say
that L1 is at least as succinct as L2, iﬀthere exists a polynomial p such that for every
sentence ϕ ∈L2, there exists an equivalent sentence ψ ∈L1 where |ψ| ≤p(|ϕ|). We say
that L1 is strictly more succinct than L2 if L1 is at least as succinct as L2 but L2 is not
at least as succinct as L1.
In our results, we consider four representation languages — URC formulas and en-
codings and PC formulas and encodings. It follows directly from the deﬁnitions that
URC encodings are at least as succinct as URC formulas, PC encodings are at least as
succinct as PC formulas, URC formulas are at least as succinct as PC formulas, and
URC encodings are at least as succinct as PC encodings.
It is a well-known fact that there are functions with a polynomial size PC encoding
that require an exponential size CNF formula without auxiliary variables even if no level
of the propagation strength is required. A folklore example is the parity of n variables
x1 ⊕. . . ⊕xn which requires CNF formula of size 2n−1 and has an encoding of linear size
using auxiliary variables yi deﬁned by the recurrence y0 = 0 and yi = yi−1⊕xi. Moreover,
the straightforward way to encode this recurrence into a CNF formula together with the
unit clause yn leads to a PC encoding, see [9]. As a consequence, URC encodings are
strictly more succinct than URC formulas and PC encodings are strictly more succinct
than PC formulas.
We prove the following result on succinctness of URC and PC
formulas without auxiliary variables.
Theorem 3.2. The language of URC formulas is strictly more succinct than the lan-
guage of PC formulas.
Every PC formula is a URC formula. Consequently, Theorem 3.2 follows from (a) in
the next proposition proven in Section 4.1.
Theorem 3.3. For every n ≥1, there is a Horn and, hence, a URC formula ϕn of size
O(n), such that
(a) every PC formula equivalent to ϕn has size 2Ω(n),
(b) there is a PC encoding of ϕn of size O(n).
Theorem 3.3 compares the succinctness of URC and PC formulas and encodings of
functions that can be represented by a polynomial size CNF formula. Due to this, the
theorem provides a separation between PC formulas and PC encodings suitable when we
6

consider compilation of a CNF formula of a moderate size into a possibly larger formula
or an encoding which is propagation complete. A similar separation in case of URC
formulas and URC encodings follows from the next proposition proven in Section 4.2.
Theorem 3.4. For every n ≥1, there is a q-Horn formula ϕn of size O(n), such that
(a) every URC formula equivalent to ϕn has size 2Ω(n),
(b) there is a PC and, hence, a URC encoding of ϕn of size O(n).
The examples of the formulas used for the separations in theorems 3.4 and 3.3 belong
to well-known tractable classes. The results demonstrate that besides the fact that Horn
formulas are URC, no other propagation properties of the formulas in these classes are
guaranteed in the following strong sense: an exponential number of additional implicates
may be necessary to obtain a PC formula equivalent to a given Horn formula or to obtain
a URC formula equivalent to a given q-Horn formula.
3.2 Irredundant PC and URC Formulas
We prove a remarkable diﬀerence in the properties of the size of irredundant PC and
irredundant URC formulas representing a given function.
A PC formula is called a
PC-irredundant formula, if removing any clause either changes the represented function
or yields a formula that is not a PC formula (such formulas were also called minimal
propagation complete formulas in [9]). A URC-irredundant formula is deﬁned in a similar
way. Namely, we prove:
• The sizes of any two PC-irredundant formulas for the same function diﬀer at most
by a factor polynomial in the number of the variables.
• There are URC-irredundant formulas for the same function such that one has size
polynomial and the other has size exponential in the number of the variables.
A PC-irredundant formula can be obtained from any PC formula in polynomial time
by repeated removal of absorbed clauses, see [9]. The ﬁrst statement means that this
is also a guarantee of a small size of a PC formula, if we disregard factors polynomial
in the number of the variables. On the other hand, the second statement means that
irredundancy cannot be used in the same way for URC formulas.
The statement above concerning PC formulas follows from the next theorem proven
in Section 5.1.
Theorem 3.5. If ϕ1 and ϕ2 are PC-irredundant representations of the same function
of n variables, then |ϕ2| ≤n2|ϕ1|.
The proof of this statement is similar to the proof of the known result [19] that the
sizes of two equivalent irredundant Horn formulas diﬀer at most by a factor at most
n −1. For the PC formulas, the factor is larger, since we have to work with absorbed
clauses instead of 1-provable implicates. This diﬀerence can be eliminated by replacing
7

the formula with its implicational dual rail encoding which represents a speciﬁc Horn
function. Using the characterization of PC formulas in Theorem 3.7 below one can obtain
a weaker form of Theorem 3.5 as a direct translation of the properties of irredundant
Horn formulas.
The statement above concerning URC formulas follows from the next proposition
proven in Section 5.2.
Proposition 3.6. For every n ≥1, there is a PC formula ϕn,1 of size O(n) and an
equivalent URC-irredundant formula ϕn,2 of size 2Ω(n).
3.3 A Characterization of PC Formulas
We use a simulation of the unit propagation in a CNF formula ϕ by an implicational
encoding DR(ϕ) described in Section 2.2 and prove that ϕ is a PC formula, if and only
if DR(ϕ) expresses a Horn function representing semantic consequence on the literals
implied by ϕ.
Since this Horn function is represented by the implicational dual rail
encoding associated with the set of all the prime implicates of ϕ, we have the following
theorem proven in Section 6.
Theorem 3.7. Let ϕ be a satisﬁable CNF formula and let ψ be the CNF formula con-
sisting of all prime implicates of ϕ. Then ϕ is a PC formula if and only if DR(ϕ) and
DR(ψ) are equivalent.
3.4 An Encoding for q-Horn Formulas
We prove that although q-Horn formulas can be strongly non-URC in the sense formu-
lated in Theorem 3.4, every q-Horn formula has a URC encoding of size polynomial in
the size of the original formula.
Theorem 3.8. Assume that ϕ(x) is a q-Horn formula with a valuation γ representing
a q-Horn function f(x). Moreover, assume a partition of the variables x = x1 ∪x2,
such that γ(x) ∈{0, 1} for every x ∈x1 and γ(x) = 1/2 for every x ∈x2. Then there
is a URC encoding ψ(x, y) of f(x) satisfying |y| = O(|x2|2), |ψ| = O(|ϕ| + |x2|3), and
∥ψ∥= O(∥ϕ∥+ |x2|3).
The encoding guaranteed in this theorem is not q-Horn in general. Note also that the
propagation strength obtained for this encoding is weaker than what we obtain for the
function used in Theorem 3.4, which has a polynomial size PC encoding.
4 Lower Bounds on the Size of Speciﬁc Formulas
In this section, we present three examples of functions suitable for proving a lower bound
on the size of a speciﬁc formula. The examples serve as proofs of theorems 3.3 and 3.4.
8

4.1 Lower Bound on the Size of a PC Formula
In this section we prove Theorem 3.3. Assume that ϕ is a satisﬁable CNF formula not
containing the variable x and let
ψ =
^
C∈ϕ
(¬x ∨C) .
(8)
One can verify that the set of prime implicates of ψ is the set of all clauses of the form
¬x ∨C, where C is a prime implicate of ϕ, see also [9]. Let us verify that the only
prime PC representation of ψ is the set of all its prime implicates. Assume that ψ′ is a
prime formula equivalent to ψ. If a prime implicate ¬x ∨D of ψ is not in ψ′, let α be
the partial assignment ¬D. Clearly, ψ′ ∧α implies ¬x, however, every clause of ψ′ has
the form ¬x ∨C, where C is a prime implicate of ϕ diﬀerent from D. It follows that C
contains at least one literal not falsiﬁed by α and, hence, the unit propagation does not
derive any additional literal from α together with ¬x ∨C. This implies that ϕ′ is not a
PC formula, hence the only prime PC formula equivalent to ψ consists of all its prime
implicates.
Each clause of the formula (8) contains the literal ¬x. Let us demonstrate that a
lower bound on the size of a PC formula based on the set of all prime implicates can be
obtained also for a formula, where diﬀerent clauses are extended with literals on diﬀerent
variables.
Lemma 4.1. Assume that ϕ = Vm
i=1 Cm is a satisﬁable CNF formula with p prime
implicates. Let x1, . . . , xm be new variables and let
ψ =
m−1
^
i=1
(¬xi ∨xi+1) ∧(¬xm ∨x1) ∧
m
^
i=1
(¬xi ∨Ci)
Then, the number of the prime implicates of ψ is mp + m(m −1) and the size of a
smallest PC representation of ψ is p + m.
Proof. Let Π be the set of all prime implicates of ϕ.
There are two types of prime
implicates of ψ. The ﬁrst type are the clauses ¬xi ∨xj where i ̸= j, 1 ≤i, j ≤m. The
second type are clauses ¬xi ∨C where 1 ≤i ≤m and C ∈Π. Hence, the number of the
prime implicates of ψ is mp + m(m −1).
Consider the formula
ψ′ =
m−1
^
i=1
(¬xi ∨xi+1) ∧(¬xm ∨x1) ∧
^
C∈Π
(¬x1 ∨C) .
This is a subset of the prime implicates of ψ and all prime implicates of ψ can be obtained
by non-merge resolution from it. It follows by results of [9] that ψ′ is a PC representation
of ψ. Since ψ′ has size p + m, there is a PC representation of this size.
Assume, ψ′′ is any prime PC representation of ψ. By applying a satisfying assignment
of ϕ to ψ′′, the clauses of the ﬁrst type are unchanged and the clauses of the second type
9

are satisﬁed. Since the restricted formula represents the equivalence of the variables xi
for 1 ≤i ≤m, the formula ψ′′ contains at least m clauses of the ﬁrst type.
Assume for a contradiction that there is an implicate D ∈Π, such that ψ′′ does not
contain any of the clauses ¬xi ∨D. Let α be the partial assignment ¬D. Clearly, ψ ∧α
implies ¬x1. On the other hand, for each clause ¬xi ∨C in ψ′′ at least one literal in C
is not falsiﬁed by α, since C and D are diﬀerent prime implicates of ϕ. Since the clause
also contains the literal ¬xi, unit propagation does not derive any additional literal from
¬xi ∨C and α. This implies that α is closed under unit propagation in the formula ψ′′
and does not contain ¬x1. This is a contradiction. It follows that ϕ′′ contains at least p
clauses of the second type and, hence, has size at least p + m.
For every m ≥3, let ψm be the Horn formula of 3m + 1 variables consisting of the
clauses
¬xi ∨¬yi ∨zi
i = 1, . . . , m −1
¬xm ∨¬z1 ∨· · · ∨¬zm−1
¬xi ∨xi+1
i = 1, . . . , m −1
¬xm ∨x1
Proposition 4.2. Formula ψm has m2m−1 + O(m2) prime implicates and its smallest
PC representation has size 2m−1 + O(m).
Proof. The formula ψ has the form from Lemma 4.1, if ϕ is
¬yi ∨zi
i = 1, . . . , m −1
¬z1 ∨· · · ∨¬zm−1
Since m ≥3, formula ϕ has 2m−1 + m −1 prime implicates. Hence, by the previous
lemma, the number of the prime implicates of ψ is m(2m−1 + (m −1)) + m(m −1) and
the smallest size of a PC formula equivalent to ψ is 2m−1 + 2m −1.
Lemma 4.3. There is a PC encoding of the function represented by ψm of size linear
in the number of the variables.
Proof. Consider the order of the variables given as x1, y1, z1, . . . , xm−1, ym−1, zm−1, xm.
One can verify that the standard construction of a Decision-DNNF using this order of
the variables in all paths leads to an OBDD of constant width. This OBDD satisﬁes
the assumption for the construction of the PC encoding CompletePath described in [1].
Since the OBDD has constant width, the encoding has size linear in the number of the
variables even if the exactly-one constraint used in CompletePath is represented by a
formula of quadratic size without auxiliary variables.
Proof of Theorem 3.3. Let m = max(n, 3). By construction, ψm is a Horn formula. The
condition (a) follows from Proposition 4.2 and condition (b) follows from Lemma 4.3.
10

4.2 Lower Bound on the Size of a URC Formula
In this section we shall proof Theorem 3.4. Given a natural number n, deﬁne a formula
ψn(x, a, b) where x = (x1, . . . , xn), a = (a1, . . . , an), and b = (b1, . . . , bn) as follows
ψn =
n−1
^
i=1
(¬ai ∨¬xi ∨xi+1)(¬ai ∨xi ∨¬xi+1)(¬bi ∨¬xi ∨xi+1)(¬bi ∨xi ∨¬xi+1)
∧(¬an ∨¬x1 ∨¬xn)(¬an ∨x1 ∨xn)(¬bn ∨¬x1 ∨¬xn)(¬bn ∨x1 ∨xn).
We can also write ψn more concisely as
ψn ≡
n−1
^
i=1
[(ai ∨bi) ⇒(xi ⇔xi+1)] ∧[(an ∨bn) ⇒(x1 ⇔¬xn)] .
(9)
Observe that ψn is not URC, because ψn ∧Vn
i=1 ai |= ⊥, however ψn ∧Vn
i=1 ai ̸⊢1 ⊥. On
the other hand, one can verify that ψn is q-Horn using the valuation γ(xi) = γ(¬xi) = 1
2,
γ(ai) = γ(bi) = 0, and γ(¬ai) = γ(¬bi) = 1 for all i = 1, . . . , n. Main part of Theorem 3.4
is the following lower bound.
Proposition 4.4. If ϕ is a URC formula equivalent to ψn, then |ϕ| ≥2n.
Proof. Without loss of generality, we can assume that ϕ is a prime formula. Since all the
ocurrences of the variables x in (9) are involved in equivalences and non-equivalences,
the set of satisfying assignments of ψn is invariant under taking the negation of all the
variables x simultaneously. This implies the following. Assume, a prime implicate C of
ϕn contains precisely one literal l ∈lit(x). Since C is prime, there is a model of the
formula, such that l is the only satisﬁed literal in C. This is not possible, since negating
all x variables in the model would lead to an assignment that is not a model of ϕn. It
follows that every prime implicate of ψn containing a literal from lit(x) contains at least
two such literals.
Let U denote the set of partial assignments α ∪β where α ⊆a, β ⊆b and for every
index i = 1, . . . , n exactly one of the variables ai and bi belongs to α ∪β. In particular
|α ∪β| = n and |U| = 2n.
Clearly, for every α ∪β ∈U, the formula ψn ∧α ∧β
is inconsistent.
It follows that the clauses in the set U = {¬(α ∧β) | α ∪β ∈U}
are implicates of ψn. Moreover, one can verify that U is precisely the set of all prime
implicates of ψn containing only the literals from lit(a∪b). Let us prove that ϕ contains
all of the implicates in U.
Assume a partial assignment α ∪β ∈U and the clause C = ¬(α ∧β). Assume for a
contradiction that C is not in ϕ. Since ϕ ∧α ∧β is inconsistent and ϕ is URC, we have
ϕ∧α∧β ⊢1 ⊥. Using the argument from the ﬁrst paragraph of the proof, this derivation
does not use any of the prime implicates containing a literal from lit(x). However, unit
propagation using implicates from U \{C} derives only negative literals on the variables
a ∪b and these literals cannot be used to continue unit propagation using clauses from
U \ {C}. This contradicts the assumption ϕ ∧α ∧β ⊢1 ⊥. It follows that C is in ϕ as
required.
11

Lemma 4.5. There is a PC encoding of the function represented by ψn of size linear in
the number of the variables.
Proof. Use the same approach as in the proof of Lemma 4.3 with the order of the
variables given as x1, a1, b1, x2, a2, b2, . . . , xn, an, bn.
Proof of Theorem 3.4. Consequence of Proposition 4.4 and Lemma 4.5.
The size of the encoding guaranteed by Lemma 4.5 is Cn + O(1) with a relatively
large constant C. Let us note that a PC encoding of the function represented by ψn
of size 4n + O(1) can be described as follows.
We use additional auxiliary variables
c = (c1, . . . , cn) and deﬁne
ψ′
n =
n^
i=1
(¬ai ∨ci)(¬bi ∨ci)
∧(¬c1 ∨· · · ∨¬cn)
∧
n−1
^
i=1
(¬ci ∨¬xi ∨xi+1)(¬ci ∨xi ∨¬xi+1)
∧(¬cn ∨¬x1 ∨¬xn)(¬cn ∨x1 ∨xn).
One can check ψ′
n(x, a, b, c) is a PC encoding of the function represented by ψn(x, a, b).
We omit the proof because it is rather technical and Lemma 4.5 is suﬃcient for the proof
of Theorem 3.4 above.
5 Irredundant PC and URC Formulas
In this section we prove the results formulated in Section 3.2.
5.1 Irredundant PC Formulas
Proof of Theorem 3.5. If C ∈ϕ1 and l ∈C, then ϕ2∧¬(C\{l}) ⊢1 l or ϕ2∧¬(C\{l}) ⊢1
⊥, since ϕ2 is a PC formula and C is its implicate. Let θC,l be a set of clauses of ϕ2
used in some of these derivations. Since the derivation is unit resolution and each clause
is used to derive a literal on a diﬀerent variable, we have |θC,l| ≤n. Moreover, we have
θC,l |= C. Let ϕ′
2 be the union of θC,l for all C ∈ϕ1 and l ∈C. Clearly, ϕ′
2 is a subset
of ϕ2 and |ϕ′
2| ≤n2|ϕ1|. It remains to verify that ϕ′
2 is a PC formula equivalent to ϕ2.
This implies that ϕ′
2 = ϕ2, since ϕ2 is PC-irredundant, and the statement follows.
Formula ϕ′
2 is implied by ϕ2 and implies ϕ1. Together, this implies that ϕ′
2 is equivalent
to both ϕ1 and ϕ2. Consider the formula ϕ′
2∧ϕ1. Since it contains ϕ1, it is a PC formula.
By construction of ϕ′
2, each clause of ϕ1 is absorbed by ϕ′
2, see [9] for more detail. This
implies that we can successively remove all clauses of ϕ1 from ϕ′
2 ∧ϕ1 while keeping its
PC property.
12

5.2 A Large Irredundant URC Formula
We call a formula URC-irredundant, if removing any clause either changes the repre-
sented function or leads to a formula that is not URC. In this section, we present an
example of a formula that can be extended by additional clauses to a PC formula of size
linear in the number of the variables and has also a URC-irredundant extension of size
exponential in the number of the variables.
Let m ≥2. Consider the variables ai, bi, ci, di, the deﬁnite Horn formulas
δi = (¬ai ∨bi) ∧(¬ai ∨ci) ∧(¬bi ∨¬ci ∨di)
for i = 1, . . . , m, and the formulas
γm =
 m
_
i=1
ai
!
∧
m
^
i=1
δi
γ′
m = γm ∧
m
^
i=1
(¬ai ∨di)
γ′′
m = γm ∧
^
I∈Em

_
i̸∈I
ai ∨
_
i∈I
di


where Em is the system of all non-empty subsets I ⊆{1, . . . , m} such that |I| is even.
Clearly, we have
|γm|
=
3m + 1
|γ′
m|
=
4m + 1
|γ′′
m|
=
3m + 2m−1
Lemma 5.1. γ′
m and γ′′
m are equivalent to γm.
Proof. For every i = 1, . . . , m, the clause (¬ai ∨di) can be obtained by resolution from
the clause (¬bi ∨¬ci ∨di) and the clauses (¬ai ∨bi), (¬ai ∨ci). This implies that γ′
m is
equivalent to γm.
For every I ⊆{1, . . . , m}, not only if I ∈Em, the clause
_
i̸∈I
ai ∨
_
i∈I
di
can be obtained by resolution from the clause Wm
i=1 ai and the clauses ¬ai ∨di for i ∈I.
This implies that γ′′
m is equivalent to γm.
Lemma 5.2. γ′
m is a PC formula.
Proof. The disjunction Wm
i=1 ai is a PC formula and also δ′
i = δi ∧(¬ai ∨di) are PC
formulas. The formula γ′
m is obtained from Wm
i=1 ai by combining it sequentially with δ′
i.
Since in each step, we combine formulas which have only one variable in common, the
formula obtained in each step is PC.
13

Lemma 5.3. γ′′
m is a URC formula.
Proof. Assume a partial assignment ρ, such that γ′′
m ∧ρ is unsatisﬁable and, hence, also
γm∧ρ is unsatisﬁable. If there is an index i ∈{1, . . . , m}, such that δi∧ρ is unsatisﬁable,
then a contradiction can be derived by unit propagation, since δi is a Horn and thus
also URC formula. Assume, each of the formulas δi ∧ρ is satisﬁable. Assume for a
contradiction that there is an index j, such that ρ ∧δj ̸|= ¬aj. The setting aj = 1
satisﬁes the clause Wm
i=1 ai in γm and we get a contradiction with the unsatisﬁability of
γm ∧ρ, since the formulas δi are independent and each of them is satisﬁable together
with ρ ∧aj.
It follows that for all i = 1, . . . , m, we have ρ ∧δi |= ¬ai.
By case
inspection, this is equivalent to the assumption that for every i = 1, . . . , m, we have
{¬ai, ¬bi, ¬ci, ¬di} ∩ρ ̸= ∅. Let J be the set of indices i, such that δi ∧ρ ̸⊢1 ¬ai. One
can verify that for every i ∈J, we have ¬di ∈ρ. This implies that the clause
_
i̸∈J
ai ∨
_
i∈J
di
is falsiﬁed by ρ and the literals derived by unit propagation limited to the subformulas
δi. If J = ∅, then this clause is contained in γm. Otherwise, we distinguish two cases. If
|J| is even, then J ∈Em and the clause is one of the additional clauses used to construct
γ′′
m.
If |J| is odd, choose an arbitrary j ∈J and consider I = J \ {j}. The only literal in
the clause
_
i̸∈I
ai ∨
_
i∈I
di ∈γ′′
m
that is not falsiﬁed by unit propagation using ρ and the formulas δi is aj. Hence, unit
propagation using this clause derives aj. Together with δj, we further derive dj and,
ﬁnally, we derive a contradiction, since ¬dj ∈ρ.
Lemma 5.4. Every URC-irredundant subformula of γ′′
m has size at least 2m−1.
Proof. Let I ∈Em and let us prove that the formula γ′′
m \ {C}, where
C =
_
i̸∈I
ai ∨
_
i∈I
di
is not a URC representation of γm. Consider the partial assignment ¬C and let us prove
that this assignment does not make any of the clauses of γ′′
m \ {C} unit or empty. This
can be veriﬁed by case inspection for the clauses of δj for every j = 1, . . . , m. Since
|I| ≥2, the clause
m
_
i=1
ai ∈γm
also does not become unit or empty. If J ∈Em \ {I}, then the number of the literals in
the clause
_
i̸∈J
ai ∨
_
i∈J
di ∈γ′′
m
14

that are not falsiﬁed by ¬C is equal to the size of the symmetric diﬀerence of the sets I
and J. Since these sets are diﬀerent and both have even size, their symmetric diﬀerence
is a non-zero even number, so at least 2. Altogether, the assignment ¬C is closed under
unit propagation for the formula γ′′
m \ {C} and, hence, unit propagation does not derive
a contradiction from ¬C ∧(γ′′
m \ {C}). Since C is an implicate of γm, this implies that
γ′′
m \ {C} is not a URC representation of γm. This ﬁnishes the proof, since the above
argument can be used for 2m−1 clauses C ∈γ′′
m.
Proof of Proposition 3.6. For a given n, let m = max(n, 2), ϕn,1 = γ′
m, and let ϕn,2 be
any URC-irredundant subformula of γ′′
m. The required properties follow from lemmas 5.2,
5.3, and 5.4.
Let us note that γ′′
m is a URC-irredundant formula.
None of the clauses of δi for
i ∈{1, . . . , m} can be removed, since this changes the restriction of the function obtained
by setting all the variables aj, bj, cj, dj for j ̸= i to 1. The clause (Wm
i=1 ai) also cannot
be removed, since this is the only unsatisﬁed clause, if all ai variables are 0 and all the
variables bi, ci, di are 1.
6 Characterization of PC Formulas
We prove a characterization of PC formulas formulated in Section 3.3 by relating their
implicational dual rail encoding to a Horn function corresponding to the semantic con-
sequence on the literals implied by the formula.
Let ϕ(x) be a formula on a set of variables x and let α ⊆lit(x) be a set of literals.
The closure of α under unit propagation in ϕ is deﬁned as
clup(ϕ, α) = {l ∈lit(x) | ϕ ∧α ⊢1 l or ϕ ∧α ⊢1 ⊥} .
If ϕ ∧α ⊢1 ⊥, then clup(ϕ, α) contains all the literals and not only those derived by unit
propagation. This is useful for the characterization of PC formulas. In contradictory
cases, diﬀerent PC formulas may derive diﬀerent sets of literals by unit propagation,
however, the closure as deﬁned above is the same. In non-contradictory cases, clup(ϕ, α)
is precisely the set of literals derived by unit propagation.
Assume, f(x) is a boolean function on x and let α ⊆lit(x) be a set of literals. The
semantic closure of α with respect to f(x) is the set of literals deﬁned as
clsem(f, α) = {l ∈lit(x) | f(x) ∧α |= l} .
If ϕ represents f, we can also use clsem(ϕ, α) instead of clsem(f, α). For every set of
literals α and a formula ϕ, we have clup(ϕ, α) ⊆clsem(ϕ, α), since the literals derived by
unit resolution are also semantic consequences.
Lemma 6.1. A formula ϕ is a PC formula, if and only if for every partial assignment
α, we have clup(ϕ, α) = clsem(ϕ, α).
15

Proof. If ϕ is a PC formula, then clup(ϕ, α) = clsem(ϕ, α) can be proven by considering
the cases ϕ ∧α |= ⊥and ϕ ∧α ̸|= ⊥separately. For the opposite direction, assume
clup(ϕ, α) = clsem(ϕ, α). Then for every l, such that ϕ ∧α |= l, we have ϕ ∧α ⊢1 l or
ϕ ∧α ⊢1 ⊥as a direct consequence of the deﬁnitions.
One can verify that both clup and clsem are closure operators on sets of literals. In
particular, the system of sets closed under any of them is closed under set intersection.
Moreover, it is well-known that two closure operators on the subsets of the same set
are equal, if and only if they have the same closed sets. Since lit(x) is the only closed
set containing complementary literals for both clup and clsem, it is suﬃcient to compare
only closed sets that are partial assignments. In order to represent partial assignments,
we use the meta-variables introduced in Section 2.2. An assignment of these variables
is the characteristic function of a set of literals. Using this, a partial assignment of the
variables x is a total assignment of the variables meta(x) satisfying for every x ∈x the
consistency clause ¬JxK ∨¬J¬xK.
Deﬁnition 6.2. We denote S(f) the set of partial assignments α satisfying clsem(f, α) =
α and hf the characteristic function of S(f) represented as a boolean function on the
variables meta(x).
Lemma 6.3. The function hf is a Horn function.
Proof. The system of closed sets of clsem is S(f) ∪{lit(x)} and it is closed under set
intersection. Since the intersection of any partial assignments α, β is not equal to lit(x),
also S(f) is closed under set intersection. The lemma follows, since a boolean function
is a Horn function, if and only if the set of its satisfying assignments is closed under
componentwise conjunction [14].
This corresponds to set intersection of the sets of
literals represented by their characteristic functions.
We use the implicational dual rail encoding described in Section 2.2 to capture the
connection of the propagation complete formulas for f and the function hf. The following
property of the implicational encoding is crucial for our purposes.
Proposition 6.4. If ϕ(x) is a CNF formula not containing the empty clause, then
the satisfying assignments of DR(ϕ) are exactly the characteristic functions of partial
assignments α of the variables in x satisfying clup(ϕ, α) = α.
Proof. The consistency clauses in DR(ϕ) are satisﬁed exactly by the characteristic func-
tions of partial assignments. Consider a partial assignment α. The remaining clauses
are equivalent to implications (5). The conjunction of these implications expresses the
condition that every literal derivable by unit propagation from α belongs to α. Let us
prove by contradiction that this implies ϕ ∧α ̸⊢1 ⊥. If ϕ ∧α ⊢1 ⊥, then there is a
non-empty clause e1 ∨. . . ∨ek ∈ϕ and the literals ¬e1, . . . , ¬ek can be derived from
ϕ∧α by unit propagation. However, this implies that e1 is derived by unit propagation,
so α is not a partial assignment closed under the rules (5). It follows that ϕ ∧α ̸⊢1 ⊥
and clup(ϕ, α) = α, since in this case, clup is the same as the closure under the rules (5).
The opposite direction is similar.
16

Let ϕ(x) be a formula representing a function f(x). If a partial assignment α ⊆lit(x)
satisﬁes clsem(ϕ, α) = α, then ϕ ∧α is consistent and clup(ϕ, α) = α. As a consequence,
we have DR(ϕ) ≥hf in the sense that this inequality holds for each assignment of
the variables meta(x). Moreover, we can characterize PC formulas representing a given
function f as follows.
Proposition 6.5. If ϕ is a CNF formula not containing the empty clause and f a
boolean function, then ϕ is a PC formula representing f, if and only if DR(ϕ) represents
hf.
Proof. Assume, DR(ϕ) represents hf. The substitutions JxK ←x and J¬xK ←¬x for
all x ∈x transform DR(ϕ) into ϕ and hf into f. It follows that ϕ represents f. By
deﬁnition of hf and Proposition 6.4, the equivalence between DR(ϕ) and hf implies that
the closure operators clup and clsem for the formula ϕ have the same closed sets and,
hence, are the same. Together with Lemma 6.1, this implies that ϕ is a PC formula.
If ϕ is a PC representation of f, then one can prove that DR(ϕ) and hf describe the
same set of partial assignments using the same steps as above in the reversed order.
Proof of Theorem 3.7. Assume that ϕ and ψ satisfy the assumption and let f be the
function they represent. Since ψ is a PC representation of f, Proposition 6.5 with ϕ
replaced by ψ implies that DR(ψ) represents hf.
The proof of the theorem is then
ﬁnished by Proposition 6.5 used for the formula ϕ.
7 URC Encoding of a q-Horn Formula
In this section, we show that every q-Horn function represented by a q-Horn formula
ϕ(x) has a URC encoding of size polynomial in the size of ϕ. Let us ﬁx a valuation γ
which shows that ϕ is q-Horn. For simplicity, we assume γ(x) ≥γ(¬x) for every variable
x ∈x. If this assumption is not satisﬁed for a variable x, we can replace all occurrences
of x with ¬x and vice versa and set γ(x) = 1 −γ(x). As a consequence, all variables in
ϕ have weight 1 or 1
2. The set of variables of weight 1 and 1
2 will be denoted as x1 and
x2, respectively.
Given a CNF formula ϕ(x) and a partial assignment β ⊆lit(x) we denote ϕ(β) the
formula which originates from ϕ by applying partial assignment β. In particular, the
clauses satisﬁed by β are removed from ϕ and negations of literals in β are removed from
the remaining clauses. Let us recall that a partial assignment β ⊆lit(x) is an autark
assignment [24] for a CNF ϕ if for every clause C ∈ϕ such that C(β) is diﬀerent from
C, we have that C is satisﬁed by β. In particular, ϕ is satisﬁable if and only if ϕ(β) is
satisﬁable.
We split the formula ϕ(x1, x2) into two subformulas ϕ1(x1) and ϕ2(x1, x2). A clause
C ∈ϕ belongs to ϕ1 if var(C) ⊆x1 and it belongs to ϕ2 otherwise. By construction,
ϕ1 is a Horn formula. Clauses in ϕ2 contain one or two variables of weight 1
2. Other
literals in these clauses have weight 0 and they are negations of variables of weight 1.
Let us recall Algorithm 1 for checking satisﬁability of a q-Horn formula ϕ described
17

Input: q-Horn formula ϕ(x), valuation γ satisfying γ(x) ∈{1
2, 1} for all x ∈x
Output: SAT if ϕ is satisﬁable, UNSAT otherwise
1 let ϕ1, ϕ2, and x1 be as described in the text
2 if ϕ1 ⊢1 ⊥then return UNSAT
3 β ←{u ∈lit(x1) | ϕ1 ⊢1 u}
4 ϕ′
2 ←{C ∈ϕ2(β) | C ⊆lit(x2)}
5 if ϕ′
2 is satisﬁable then return SAT else return UNSAT
Algorithm 1: Satisﬁability checking of a q-Horn formula [10]
in [10]. The input to the satisﬁability checking procedure is a q-Horn formula ϕ and
a valuation γ satisfying the assumption formulated above. The proof of correctness of
Algorithm 1 relies on the following property of ϕ(β) = ϕ1(β) ∧ϕ2(β). If C is a clause in
ϕ(β) which contains a literal on a variable in x1, then C contains a negative literal on
a (possibly diﬀerent) variable in x1. It follows that these clauses can be satisﬁed by an
autark assignment that assigns 0 to all the remaining variables x1.
We shall construct a URC encoding ψ(x, y) for a given q-Horn formula ϕ(x). Unit
propagation in the encoding allows to simulate Algorithm 1 with a formula ϕ ∧α as an
input, where α ⊆lit(x). Formula ϕ′
2 created in Step 4 is a 2-CNF formula on variables
x2 and we can thus check its satisﬁability in linear time in Step 5, see for example [2].
In the URC encoding, Step 5 is implemented by simulating a resolution derivation of a
contradiction from ϕ′
2 in which only resolvents of size at most 2 are needed. The number
of such resolvents is at most quadratic in the number of the variables in x2. We can
thus encode the resolution rules into a polynomial number of clauses of the encoding.
Let us ﬁrst introduce a necessary notation. Given a q-Horn formula ϕ = ϕ1 ∧ϕ2, we
denote ϕq = {C ∩lit(x2) | C ∈ϕ2} which is a 2-CNF formula on variables of weight 1
2.
Moreover, let ϕ+
q be the set of all clauses of size 2 which can be derived by resolution
from ϕq and we associate a meta-variable JCK with every clause C ∈ϕ+
q . Note that if
we test satisﬁability of ϕ ∧α instead of ϕ in Algorithm 1, the formula ϕ′
2 can contain
group
clause
condition
(q1)
C
C ∈ϕ and |var(C) ∩x2| ≤1
(q2)
¬xi1 ∨· · · ∨¬xik ∨Ju ∨vK
¬xi1 ∨· · · ∨¬xik ∨u ∨v ∈ϕ2
(q3)
¬Ju ∨vK ∨¬J¬v ∨wK ∨Ju ∨wK
u ∨v, ¬v ∨w, u ∨w ∈ϕ+
q
(q4)
¬Ju ∨vK ∨¬Ju ∨¬vK ∨u
u ∨v, u ∨¬v ∈ϕ+
q
(q5)
¬Ju ∨vK ∨v ∨u
u ∨v ∈ϕ+
q
(q6)
¬u ∨Ju ∨vK
u ∨v ∈ϕ+
q
Table 1: The clauses of encoding ψ(x, y) for a q-Horn formula ϕ(x), where u and v
denote arbitrary literals from lit(x2).
18

additional unit clauses from α ∩lit(x2), however, all its quadratic clauses belong to ϕq.
The encoding ψ(x, y) for ϕ(x) uses the variables
y = {JCK | C ∈ϕ+
q }
as auxiliary variables and consists of the clauses in Table 1.
Let us look more closely to clauses of the encoding. Group (q1) consists of all clauses
of ϕ1 and some of the clauses of ϕ2.
The clauses of (q1) that belong to ϕ1 allow
unit propagation on the clauses of ϕ1, thus implementing the ﬁrst part of Algorithm 1.
Clauses of group (q1) that belong to ϕ2 and clauses of group (q2) allow to derive by
unit propagation a representation of the clauses of ϕ′
2.
Unit clauses are represented
directly and each binary clause in ϕ′
2 is represented by the corresponding meta-variable.
Clauses of groups (q3) to (q5) allow to simulate resolution on binary clauses in ϕ′
2
represented by meta-variables by unit propagation in ψ(x, y).
In particular, clause
¬Ju∨vK∨¬J¬v∨wK∨Ju∨wK in group (q3) allows to derive the literal Ju∨wK representing
a resolvent assuming the literals Ju ∨vK and J¬v ∨wK representing the original clauses.
Similarly, clause ¬Ju ∨vK ∨¬Ju ∨¬vK ∨u in group (q4) allows to derive resolvent u
assuming Ju ∨vK and Ju ∨¬vK. Finally, clause ¬Ju ∨vK ∨v ∨u in group (q5) allows to
derive resolvent u assuming Ju ∨vK and ¬v. Clauses of groups (q5) and (q6) together
represent the equivalences u ∨v ⇔Ju ∨vK for all clauses in ϕ+
q . They thus deﬁne the
semantics of the meta-variables Ju ∨vK in y.
Lemma 7.1. Formula ψ(x, y) is an encoding of ϕ(x).
Proof. The clauses of groups (q5) and (q6) imply the clauses of groups (q3) and (q4).
Moreover, they also imply that the clauses of groups (q1) and (q2) are equivalent to
ϕ(x). It follows that ψ(x, y) is equivalent to the conjunction of ϕ(x) and the clauses
of groups (q5) and (q6). This conjunction is clearly an encoding of ϕ(x) obtained by
adding deﬁnitions of the new variables y.
Lemma 7.2. Let α ⊆lit(x) be a partial assignment. If ψ(x, y) ∧α |= ⊥, then ψ(x, y) ∧
α ⊢1 ⊥.
Proof. Assume, ψ(x, y)∧α |= ⊥. By Lemma 7.1, we have ϕ(x)∧α |= ⊥. If γ satisﬁes (7)
for the formula ϕ, it satisﬁes (7) also for the formula ϕ ∧α. It follows that Algorithm 1
detects unsatisﬁability of ϕ ∧α using the valuation γ derived originally for ϕ.
Let
α1 = α ∩lit(x1) and α2 = α ∩lit(x2). When used for ϕ ∧α, Algorithm 1 uses ϕi ∧αi
instead of ϕi for i = 1, 2.
If ϕ1 ∧α1 ⊢1 ⊥, then also ψ(x, y) ∧α ⊢1 ⊥since ϕ1 ∧α1 ⊆ψ ∧α due to clauses
in group (q1). Now assume ϕ1 ∧α1 ̸⊢1 ⊥. Consider the assignment b1 used to obtain
ϕ′
2 ∧α2 = (ϕ2 ∧α2)(b1) in Algorithm 1. Since b1 is an autark assignment for the formula
ϕ∧α and satisﬁes all clauses of ϕ1 ∧α1, we have ϕ′
2 ∧α2 |= ⊥. We claim that in this case
for any clause u ∨v ∈ϕ′
2 we have ψ(x, y) ∧α ⊢1 Ju ∨vK. Since u ∨v ∈ϕ′
2, there must
be a clause C = ¬xi1 ∨· · · ∨¬xik ∨u ∨v in ϕ2 and ϕ1 ∧α1 ⊢1 xij for every j = 1, . . . , k.
Using clauses of group (q1) we derive that also ψ(x, y) ∧α ⊢1 xij for every j = 1, . . . , k
and then using a clause of group (q2) corresponding to C we get ψ(x, y) ∧α ⊢1 Ju ∨vK.
19

Similarly, using clauses of group (q1) in ϕ2, we obtain ψ(x, y)∧α ⊢1 u for any unit clause
u ∈ϕ′
2. Unit clauses in α2 are contained in ψ(x, y) ∧α directly. Since ϕ′
2 ∧α2 |= ⊥,
there is a literal u ∈lit(x2), such that unit clauses u and ¬u can be derived by resolution
from ϕ′
2 ∧α2. Clauses of groups (q3) to (q5) allow to simulate resolution on at most
binary clauses using unit propagation.
Using this, we obtain ψ(x, y) ∧α ⊢1 u and
ψ(x, y) ∧α ⊢1 ¬u. Together we obtain ψ(x, y) ∧α ⊢1 ⊥.
Next, we show that ψ(x, y) is a URC formula. We will ﬁrst show that we can allow
positive occurrences of variables from y in the partial assignment.
Lemma 7.3. Let α ⊆lit(x) ∪y be a partial assignment. If ψ(x, y) ∧α |= ⊥, then
ψ(x, y) ∧α ⊢1 ⊥.
Proof. Assume ψ(x, y)∧α |= ⊥. Let us split α in two partial assignments αx = α∩lit(x)
and αy = α ∩y. The formula
ϕ′(x) = ϕ(x) ∧
^
JCK∈αy
C
is q-Horn using the valuation γ, since we add to ϕ binary clauses on the variables x2.
The encoding of ϕ′(x) constructed according to Table 1 is ψ′(x, y) = ψ(x, y)∧αy. Since
α = αx ∪αy, we have ψ(x, y) ∧α = ψ′(x, y) ∧αx and thus ψ′(x, y) ∧αx |= ⊥. By
Lemma 7.2 we get that ψ′(x, y) ∧αx |= ⊥implies ψ′(x, y) ∧αx ⊢1 ⊥. This is equivalent
to ψ(x, y) ∧α ⊢1 ⊥.
Lemma 7.4. Let α ⊆lit(x ∪y) be a partial assignment. If ψ(x, y) ∧α |= ⊥, then
ψ(x, y) ∧α ⊢1 ⊥.
Proof. Assume ψ(x, y) ∧α |= ⊥. Let us split α into three partial assignments αx =
α ∩lit(x), αy = α ∩y, and αy = α ∩{¬y | y ∈y}. Moreover, let α′
y = {¬u, ¬v |
¬Ju ∨vK ∈αy}. Since ψ(x, y) |= u ∨v ⇔Ju ∨vK, we have ψ(x, y) |= αy ⇔α′
y. It follows
that ψ(x, y) ∧αx ∧αy ∧α′
y |= ⊥.
By Lemma 7.3 we get ψ(x, y) ∧αx ∧αy ∧α′
y ⊢1 ⊥. Using clauses of groups (q5)
and (q6), this is equivalent to ψ(x, y) ∧αx ∧αy ∧αy ⊢1 ⊥and thus to ψ(x, y) ∧α ⊢1 ⊥
as required.
We are now ready to prove the main result of this section formulated in Section 3.4.
Proof of Theorem 3.8. The existence of the required encoding follows from lemmas 7.1
and 7.4. The size estimates follow directly from the construction described in Table 1.
Let us point out that the encoding in Table 1 is not q-Horn in general.
If the
groups (q5) and (q6) of clauses are present in the encoding for some literals u, v, they
contain clauses ¬Ju ∨vK ∨v ∨u, ¬u ∨Ju ∨vK, ¬v ∨Ju ∨vK. One can easily verify that a
valuation γ satisfying (7) for these clauses has to satisfy γ(u) = γ(v) = γ(Ju ∨vK) = 0.
The variable Ju ∨vK is included in the encoding, if the original q-Horn formula requires
γ(u) = γ(v) = 1/2. In this case, the system of inequalitites (7) for the encoding in
Table 1 is inconsistent.
20

8 Conclusion and Further Research
We strengthened the known results on the expressive power of PC and URC formulas
and proved structural properties of PC formulas which can have applications to their
use in knowledge compilation. By the results of Section 4, there is no guarantee for the
existence of a reasonably sized PC formula equivalent to a given CNF, even if it belongs
to a tractable class of Horn or q-Horn formulas. On the other hand, PC encodings are
known [23] to be strictly stronger than Decision-DNNF and also DNNF which are cur-
rently the strongest routinely used compilation languages. Not surprisingly, identifying
good auxiliary variables remains as an important hard problem critical for the construc-
tion of small CNF encodings. However, the results of Section 5 and Section 6 suggest
that heuristics for searching good PC representations or encodings with a ﬁxed set of
auxiliary variables may exist.
The methods for compilation not introducing new auxiliary variables are investigated
in a related ongoing research using a program pccompile [21]. Preliminary experiments
with this program [22] demonstrate that such a compilation is frequently tractable for
formulas of a few hundreds of clauses that appear as benchmarks in knowledge com-
pilation. Further research is needed to better clarify the conditions under which this
compilation is tractable. The correspondence between dual rail encoding of a PC for-
mula and a speciﬁc Horn function presented in Section 6 in this paper is used also in
one of the algorithms implemented in [21] to improve eﬃciency.
Let us close the paper with the following questions left open for further research. In
Theorem 3.5 we have shown that if ϕ1(x) and ϕ2(x) are two PC-irredundant formulas
representing the same function f(x) on n = |x| variables, then |ϕ2| ≤n2|ϕ1|.
It is
natural to ask if the bound can be strengthened in the following sense.
Question 1. Is it possible to strengthen the bound from Theorem 3.5 to |ϕ2| = O(n|ϕ1|)?
By Theorem 3.8 there is a polynomial size URC encoding for an arbitrary q-Horn for-
mula. It is natural to ask whether we can in fact construct a PC encoding of polynomial
size. This question is open already for the class of Horn formulas contained in the class
of q-Horn formulas and we can thus pose the following question.
Question 2. Let ϕ(x) be a Horn formula or, more generally, a URC formula. Is there
a PC encoding ψ(x, y) of ϕ of size polynomial in the size of ϕ?
Using the notation from Theorem 3.8, the size of the URC encoding constructed for
a q-Horn formula ϕ(x1, x2) is O(|ϕ| + |x2|3).
Question 3. Is there a URC encoding for a q-Horn formula ϕ of size O(|ϕ| + |x2|c),
where c < 3?
