Accounting for hidden common causes when inferring
cause and effect from observational data
David Heckerman
Santa Monica, CA 90402

Abstract
Identifying causal relationships from observation data is difﬁcult, in large part, due
to the presence of hidden common causes. In some cases, where just the right
patterns of conditional independence and dependence lie in the data—for example,
Y-structures—it is possible to identify cause and effect. In other cases, the analyst
deliberately makes an uncertain assumption that hidden common causes are absent,
and infers putative causal relationships to be tested in a randomized trial. Here,
we consider a third approach, where there are sufﬁcient clues in the data such that
hidden common causes can be inferred.
Example and basic results
We illustrate the approach with an example fromm genomics. We consider the task of a genome-wide
association study (GWAS), wherein one tries to identify which genetic markers known as single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) causally inﬂuence some trait of interest (e.g., height). Figure 1a
shows a generative model for the task. In many cases, the relationship between the causal SNPs and
trait is well represented by multiple linear regression (unlike the special cases of dominance and
recessiveness that we learn about in high-school biology). The hidden common causes of the SNPs
(here represented by a single hidden node) often corresponds to family relatedness (close or distant)
among the individuals in the cohort. A million or more SNPs can be measured, but only a relatively
small fraction of them causally inﬂuence the trait. The goal of causal inference is to identify the
SNPs that do.
If there were no hidden common causes of the SNPs, one could distinguish causal from non-causal
SNPs by applying univariate linear regression to assess the correlation between a SNP and trait,
producing a P value based on, for example, a likelihood ratio test. The separation of causal and
non-causal SNPs won’t be perfect, as some non-causal SNPs will have small P values by chance.
Nonetheless, the distribution of P values among the non-causal SNPs should be uniform (we say the
P values are calibrated), whereas the distribution of P values among the causal SNPs will be highly
skewed to small values, allowing for a separation of causal from non-causal SNPs that is often useful
in practice.
When family relatedness is present, univariate linear regression fails because non-causal SNPs are
correlated with the trait, As seen in Figure 1a, there are d-connecting paths between each non-causal
SNP and the trait through the hidden variable. These so-called spurious associations clutter the results,
leading researchers on expensive and time consuming wild goose chases. To address this problem,
one could perform multiple linear regression conditioning on all causal SNPs. Unfortunately, we
don’t know which SNPs are causal. Consequently, an approach now commonly used in the genomics
community is to condition on all SNPs except for the one being tested for association. As there can
be millions of SNPs in an analysis, L2 regularization is used to attenuate variance.
Experiments with synthetic data (to be described in more detail) show that this approach of condi-
tioning on all SNPs yields calibrated P values across many GWASs with a wide range of realistic
Presented at the NIPS workshop on causal inference (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.
arXiv:1801.00727v2  [cs.AI]  3 Jan 2018

(a)
(b)
Figure 1: (a) Graphical model for the data-generation processes in GWAS. The variable h is hidden,
representing family relatedness in the cohort. The variables xi correspond to SNPs, some of which
causally inﬂuence the trait y. (b) False-positive rate among non-causal SNPs as a function of the P
value threshold α in experiments on synthetic data. The blue and green lines correspond to univariate
regression and L2 regularized multiple linear regression, respectively. Gray shading represents 95%
conﬁdence intervals assuming P values are calibrated.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2: Figures corresponding to those in Figure 1, but where there is a direct inﬂuence of the
hidden variable on the trait.
values for degree of family relatedness, number of causal SNPs, and the strength of causal inﬂuences
(Figure 1b).
Now consider a more difﬁcult case shown in Figure 2a, where there is a direct inﬂuence of the hidden
variable on the trait. In practice, this inﬂuence can happen when different populations or families
have different environments that can affect the trait. In this case, although conditioning on all SNPs
does not block all d-connecting paths from non-causal SNPs to the trait, regularized multiple linear
regression still yields calibrated P values across a wide range of GWASs (Figure 2b).
Informally, what is happening is that the observation of the many SNPs, all of which depend in a
noisy fashion on the same family relatedness, makes it possible to infer the hidden variable, and thus
block the remaining d-connecting paths. In the remainder of this paper, we examine the data models
and these results in more detail.
L2 regularized multiple linear regression
Let yi, x∗
i , and Xi = (xi1, . . . , xiK) denote the trait, test SNP (the one we are computing a P
value for), and K remaining SNPs for the ith individual, respectively. For reasons that will become
clear, we call the remaining SNPs similarity SNPs. Let y = (y1, . . . , yN)T, x∗= (x∗
1, . . . , x∗
N)T,
2

and X = (XT
1 , . . . , XT
N)T denote the observations of the trait, test SNP, and K similarity SNPs,
respectively, across the individuals. Thus, X is an N ×K matrix, where the ijth element corresponds
to the jth similarity SNP of the ith individual. We model the inﬂuence of the SNPs on the trait as
follows:
y ∼N(1µ + x∗β∗+ Xβ; σ2
eI),
where µ is an offset and 1 is column of ones, β∗is the weight relating the test SNP to the trait,
βT = (β1, . . . , βK) are the weights relating the similarity SNPs to the trait, σ2
e is a scalar, and N(.; .)
denotes the multivariate normal distribution.
Using L2 regularization (a Bayesian) approach, we assume that each of the βis corresponding to the
similarity SNPs are mutually independent, each having a normal distribution with the same variance
βi ∼N(0; σ2
g), i = 1, ..., K.
Further, we standardize the observations of each SNP across the individuals to have variance 1 (and
mean 0) so that, a priori, each SNP has an equal inﬂuence on the trait.
Averaging over the distributions of the βis, we obtain
y ∼N(1µ + x∗β∗; σ2
eI + σ2
gXXT).
(1)
The distribution in (1) is a linear mixed model [1,2]. The distribution also corresponds to a Gaussian
process with a linear covariance or kernel function [3]. The model implies that the correlation
between the traits of two individuals is related to the dot product of the similarity SNPs for those two
individuals, hence the name similarity SNPs. The similarity matrix XXT is known as the Realized
Relationship Matrix (RRM) [4]. In general, other similarity measures can be and have been used.
Note that the similarity matrix captures the dependencies among the SNPs induced by the hidden
common cause (family relatedness).
To compute a P value for the test SNPs, the parameters of the model (µ, β∗, σe, σg) are ﬁrst ﬁt with
restricted maximum likelihood. All parameters can be computed in closed form except the ratio of σ2
g
to σ2
e, which is usually (and herein) determined via grid search [2]. Then, an F-test is used to evaluate
the hypothesis β∗= 0 [5]. To improve computational efﬁciency with little effect on accuracy, rather
than ﬁt σ2
g/σ2
e for each test SNP, we obtain a ﬁt assuming all SNPs are similarity SNPs, and then use
it when ﬁtting the remaining parameters for each test SNP [1].
Experiments
Both of the experiments described in the opening section are taken from [6]. For each experiment,
we generated a large number of GWAS data sets with varying parameters to be described, each with
50, 000 SNPs and N = 4, 000 individuals. For each data set, we created family relatedness by mating
randomly selected synthetic individuals, producing 10 offspring per parent pair. The fraction of
offspring in the population was varied across the generated data sets. In a single mating, the genotype
of the child was constructed by selecting one copy of the genotype from the mother and one copy
from the father. The SNPs of parents were generated with a minor allele frequency (MAF) sampled
uniformly from the range [0.05, 0.5]. Causal SNPs of varying number were then selected at random.
Finally, for each individual, a continuous phenotype was generated from L2 regularized multiple
regression on the causal SNPs. Parameter values used in these simulations were as follows:
• Fraction of individuals belonging to a family: 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9
• Number of causal SNPs: 10, 50, 100, 500, 1000
• σ2
g/(σ2
g + σ2
e): 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6
For each of our two experiments, three data sets for each possible combination of these parameters
were generated, yielding 3 x 5 x 5 x 6 = 450 data sets. Different random seeds were used to generate
each set of SNPs so that no two sets were the same. SNPs were generated such that there was no
3

linkage disequilibrium (correlations among SNPs near one another due to meiosis) to simplify the
analysis and discussion.
In our ﬁrst experiment corresponding to no direct arc from h to y, we generated y given the SNPs
using distribution (1) with no test SNP, causal SNPs X, and µ = 0. In our second set of experiments
corresponding to a direct arc from h to y, we created that arc by additionally generating 100 hidden
causal SNPs drawn from the same family relatedness as the observed SNPs. That is, we used the
generating distribution
y ∼N(0; σ2
eI + σ2
gXXT + σ2
hWWT).
(2)
where X and W correspond to the observed and hidden causal SNPs, respectively, and σ2
h is another
scale parameter set so that σ2
h/(σ2
h + σ2
e) = 0.3.
For each data set in both experiments, P values were determined using distribution (1) as described
in the section on regularized multiple linear regression.
Discussion
We can now understand the experimental results. In the ﬁrst experiment, although the data was
generated using the similarity matrix of the causal SNPs whereas the data was ﬁt using the similarity
matrix of all SNPs, P values were calibrated. Calibration occurred because the two similarity matrices
were nearly identical, as they were drawn from the same pattern of family relatedness.
In the second experiment, the similarity matrices of all SNPs, the causal observed SNPs, and the
causal hidden SNPs were drawn from the same pattern of family relatedness, and again were nearly
identical. Thus, the ﬁt to the data remained good, and P values were calibrated. In terms of the
causal model, it was possible to infer the family relatedness, in effect inferring h and blocking the
d-connecting paths in the model.
A closing general remark: GWAS is a very simple problem in causal inference. We know that SNPs
cause traits and not the other way around, so the only real challenge is to identify which SNPs
are non-spuriously correlated with the trait. The fact that this seemingly simple problem requires
advanced treatment highlights the complexity of the general problem of causal inference in the
presence of hidden causes.
