Towards ML/AI-based Prediction of Mobile Service 
Usage in Next-Generation Networks 
Tarik Taleb1,2,3, Abdelquoddouss Laghrissi2, and Djamel Eddine Bensalem1 
1 Aalto University, Espoo, Finland 
2 Oulu University, Oulu, Finland 
3 Sejong University, Seoul, Korea 

 
 
Abstract—The adoption of machine learning techniques in 
next-generation networks has increasingly attracted the attention 
of the research community. This is to provide adaptive learning 
and decision-making approaches to meet the requirements of 
different verticals, and to guarantee the appropriate performance 
requirements in complex mobility scenarios. In this perspective, 
the characterization of mobile service usage represents a funda- 
mental step. 
In this vein, this paper highlights the new features and 
capabilities offered by the “Network Slice Planner” (NSP) in 
its second version [12]. It also proposes a method combining 
both supervised and unsupervised learning techniques to analyze 
the behavior of a mass of mobile users in terms of service 
consumption. We exploit the data provided by the NSP v2 to 
conduct our analysis. Furthermore, we provide an evaluation of 
both the accuracy of the predictor and the performance of the 
underlying MEC infrastructure. 
Index Terms—Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Net- 
work Slice Planner, 5G, and MEC. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) techniques are considered key 
technologies, able to provide precious insights by analyzing 
the huge amount of data generated by network devices, 
mobile applications, and even user behavior. Furthermore, 
the analysis of user mobility, as well as the characterization 
of mobile application usage, are getting crucial to provide 
useful information for service provisioning and management, 
thus accommodating the mobile users’ expectations in densely 
populated areas. 
To optimize the delivery of mobile services, it is important 
to understand where, when, and what mobile service users 
launch over time. With such per-service understanding of 
mobile traffic, supported by adequate models and predictors, 
the mobile traffic demand can be anticipated and both mo- 
bile services and their delivery networks can be accordingly 
customized. Such study of spatio-temporal characterization 
of mobile service consumption can also help in making a 
meaningful grouping of users (e.g., grouping users that move 
within the same neighborhood and launch the same set of 
services at nearly the same time). This shall help, in turn, to 
develop a better understanding of the aggregated behaviors of 
mobile users at specific locations. 
One of the most common challenges for such studies is 
the availability of the dataset. Indeed, the data needed to 
characterize the users’ behaviors are critical, yet not available 
 
due to concerns relevant to the privacy of users. Therefore, 
to cope with this challenge, in this paper, we resort to 
simulation. A new version of the NSP Simulator, introduced in 
Section IV, is used to acquire the needed data. Appropriate AI 
techniques are then selected to achieve accurate mobile service 
characterization, and an extended performance evaluation is 
carried out to evaluate the robustness and accuracy of the 
proposed techniques. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec- 
tion II introduces some related research work. After a brief 
introduction to Machine Learning in Section III, the Network 
Slice Planner v2 is described in Section IV. In Section V, the 
method proposed to predict the usage behavior as well as the 
approach to handle the prediction are explained. Section VI 
discusses the obtained results, comparing scenarios with and 
without the envisioned prediction method. Finally, the paper 
concludes in Section VII. 
II. RELATED WORK 
Machine learning techniques are deemed highly important 
to further optimize next generation networks [1]. In theory, 
machine learning can be used for automating network opera- 
tions. However, the implementation in a real-life scenario faces 
several limiting factors (i.e., legacy network equipment, the 
complexity of the network, and scattered control). But with 
the emergence of key technologies for network Softwarization, 
such as Software Defined Networking (SDN) and Network 
Function Virtualization (NFV), networks have become more 
homogeneous and network control can be remotely carried out 
from a centralized entity. Around these technologies, authors 
in [2] proposed an architecture of an automated network, 
leveraging machine learning for a real-time balancing of 
resources. 
In this context, Naboulsi et al [3] were able to categorize 
the call data records obtained from diverse operators using an 
unsupervised technique based on the usage characteristics of 
the users. This experiment allowed an accurate prediction of 
usage dynamics. On the other hand, the study conducted in [4] 
focused on finding correlations between multiple parameters 
such as the subscriber identifier, data consumption and access 
time. Such studies can help in adapting the network according 
to the users’ needs. Nowadays, the usage of smartphones is 
more varied and is not only bound to simple phone calls. This 

has motivated several research activities to use a monitoring 
application to collect data related to the users’ behaviors and 
their patterns of service usage directly from smartphones [5]. 
Multi-Access Edge Computing (MEC) is an emerging tech- 
nology that aims to reduce end to end latency by providing 
a cloud infrastructure at the edge of the network and hosting 
services nearby end-users. When efficiently exploited, such 
key technology combined with artificial intelligence can help 
to improve the overall network performance [6, 7]. In this vein, 
the authors in [8] proposed applying a reinforcement learning 
approach in a MEC-based environment to achieve a dynamic 
resource allocation ensuring good performance. Such analysis 
could help in increasing both the Quality of Experience (QoE) 
and Quality of Service (QoS). 
III. MACHINE LEARNING 
Machine learning aims to extract knowledge from data. This 
process of learning is performed through algorithms. A variety 
of algorithms exist, depending on the nature of the problem, 
and some are more suited than others. Machine learning can 
be divided into three main categories, each category has its 
own way to handle the learning [10]: 
1) Supervised Learning: This category applies to labeled 
data, where the algorithm will create models that take 
unlabeled data instances as input and map them to their 
corresponding label. This approach is mostly used for 
resolving classification problems. 
2) Unsupervised Learning: This kind of learning takes 
unlabeled data, tries to search for predominant patterns, 
and regroups them accordingly. This category is appro- 
priate for clustering problems. 
3) Reinforcement Learning: This method relies on ob- 
servations to learn from the environment in an iterative 
fashion, then exploits the acquired knowledge to adopt 
the correct course of actions and reach the goal state. 
Most of the machine learning algorithms belong to either 
one or more of the aforementioned categories. For instance, 
Support Vector Machine (SVM), Decision Trees and K- 
Nearest Neighbor (KNN) are mostly applied when treating a 
supervised learning problem; K-Means is a popular algorithm 
for resolving unsupervised learning problems. Regarding Re- 
inforcement Learning, Q-Learning tends to be widely used 
among the learning policies. 
IV. NETWORK SLICE PLANNER V2 
The ability to anticipate the demand for network resources 
requires a deep understanding and analysis of the behavior of 
users and that is in terms of both users’ mobility and their 
patterns of mobile service consumption over space and time. 
To that end, information such as location, service usage and 
data consumption are crucial. This set of information could 
be collected either from a mobile operator or by using a 
monitoring application installed on the users’ terminals (e.g., 
smartphones). Due to the critical nature of such data (i.e., since 
it is directly related to the privacy of users, mobile operators 
and users are reluctant to share data), it has become more 
apparent and useful to rely on realistic simulation solutions. 
Indeed, even though anonymizing the data, by replacing 
subscribers’ unique identifiers, could seem a viable solution 
to address this issue, the privacy could still be breached. This 
was portrayed in [11] where the authors conducted an analysis 
on the locations visited by users and were able to identify 
individual users according to their frequency of movement. It 
was presumed that the most frequently visited places could 
represent either home or work places. 
To cope with the unavailability of such data, NSP mimics 
as much as possible real-life use-cases, by defining a spatio- 
temporal modeling of mobile service usage over a particular 
geographical area and in real time1. The generation of services 
is based on models that characterize the behavior of real 
users in consuming different types of services such as video 
streaming, social networks, and Internet of Things services 
(IoT). The mathematical background behind each service-type 
within the service consumption module of NSP is given in 
[12], and its consequent compound traffic is validated in [9]. 
Many virtual network function placement algorithms exploited 
the traces generated from NSP such as in [16]. NSP was then 
extended for the abstraction of the LTE workload generation, 
and the performance modelling of the whole LTE network [9]. 
In NSP, users are simulated with different mobility profiles 
(i.e., walking, biking, or driving) that are enhanced relying on 
Google APIs, and several patterns in mobile service consump- 
tion. The first version implements multiple services such as 
video streaming, social networks and instant messaging [12]. 
The new version is more aligned with 5G use-cases, as it 
incorporates services related to Unmanned Aerial Vehicles 
(UAVs) and IoT. It also simulates the cloud resource usage 
in terms of RAM, CPU, and storage, as well as networking- 
relevant events (e.g., handoff operations, Tracking Area Up- 
dates (TAU), migration, and offloading operations). Leveraging 
LENA NS32, NSP provides detailed information and statistics 
on Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) (e.g., temporal variation 
of PHY Layer KPIs such as RSRP (Reference Signal Receive 
Power) and SINR (Signal-to-Interference-plus-Noise Ratio) 
reported by User Equipments (UEs), temporal PDCP (Packet 
Data Convergence Protocol) Layer KPIs such as the average 
PDU size and delay) and events (e.g., detailed logs related to 
the signaling messages generated during a handoff operation 
such as UE’s position, time, cell ID, UE’s IMSI, and average 
SINR). 
A. Added Services 
In this sub-section, we highlight the new services within 
NSP v2, namely UAV and IoT services. 
1) UAV Services: UAV-related services are implemented 
as a drone delivery service and a drone transportation 
service. NSP uses Software in the Loop (SITL) with 
Ardupilot to simulate realistic drone behavior. Packets 
1Network Slice Planner: http://mosaic-lab.org/implementations.aspx 
2The 
LTE-EPC 
Network 
Simulator 
(LENA) 
project: 
http://iptechwiki.cttc.es/LTE-EPC Network Simulator (LENA) 

generated, such as defined in the MavLink Protocol3, 
are then collected in addition to the network related 
information. When a UE requests one of the UAV-related 
services, a drone is then dispatched from the drone home 
to the destination of the UE. Such a way enables the 
simulation of realistic use cases of UAV services with 
an accurate behavior. 
2) IoT Services: IoT related services are implemented as 
sensors that collect diverse data. Based on the Con- 
strained Application Protocol (COAP), accurate data 
usage is calculated. Three types of IoT services were 
envisioned: Weather and Air Pollution Services, the data 
of which is harvested from Open Weather API to reflect 
realistic weather conditions in the simulated area; and a 
Parking Lots Service with sensors that track the number 
of places available in the parking lots of the simulated 
area. 
B. Multi-Access Edge Computing Simulation 
 
 
Fig. 1. Multi-Access Edge Computing Simulation Architecture. 
 
NSP implements a Multi-Access Edge Computing Simu- 
lation module. This module aims to generate realistic data 
related to cloud infrastructure resources usage, and that is in 
terms of CPU, RAM and storage capacity. Several important 
events were considered (e.g., offloading and migration). The 
general architecture of the simulator is shown in Figure 1. 
The MEC module is event-driven, where throughout the 
simulation and depending on the context, different events can 
be triggered and then processed. We defined several types 
of events, such as Offloading Request, Offloading Success, 
Offloading Failure, Migration, Migration Success, Migration 
3Mavlink protocol: http://qgroundcontrol.org/mavlink/start 
Failure, Migration Aborted, and Release. The detailed mech- 
anism of this module is given as follows. 
First, when a UE starts using a service, an Offloading 
Request Event is triggered. Depending on the availability of 
the resources in the Edge Cloud (EC), an application is then 
transferred from the Global Cloud of the service provider to 
the nearest EC. It shall be noted that the term ”application” 
refers to any kind of tasks that consumes resources in the MEC 
infrastructure. 
Since each EC contains a fixed set of Virtual Machines 
(VMs), multiple policies were defined to select the appropriate 
VM that will carry the task. These policies are as follows: 
1) First-Fit: it consists of choosing the first available VM 
that has enough resources. 
2) Best-Fit: the application will be placed in a VM that 
contains the smallest sufficient amount of resources 
required in terms of CPU, RAM and Storage capacity. 
3) Random: a random VM which has enough resources 
will be chosen as the one that will handle the application. 
Based on the concept of Follow Me Cloud [13], migration 
events are triggered. Therefore, when a UE moves from 
one region to another, if a closer and more adequate EC 
is available, a migration process of the application from the 
previous EC to the new one is performed and the related events 
are then triggered. Finally, when the UE finishes using the 
service, a Release Event is triggered and the application will 
be terminated, freeing the resources. 
V. SERVICE PREDICTION 
In order to predict the service consumption of users, it is 
important to analyze their behavior. In this perspective, we 
introduce an approach based on the concept of highly-dense 
areas. The idea is that before entering the phase of service pre- 
diction, a first step consists in determining areas that contain 
the largest number of users. Once these areas are identified, 
the service analysis will focus on them, thus allowing the 
system to predict the prevailing services consumed by a mass 
of users, rather than services consumed occasionally by a few 
individuals scattered over less-populated areas. 
 
TABLE I 
THE CONSIDERED FEATURES AND THEIR DESCRIPTION. 
 
Feature 
Description 
Time 
The times in seconds 
UE ID 
The unique identifier of the user equipment 
Service Name 
The name of the service that is being used 
Latitude 
The latitude value of the GPS coordinate 
Longitude 
The longitude value of the GPS coordinate 
ENodeB ID 
The unique identifier of the ENodeB 
Datarate Uplink 
The throughput of the user in the uplink 
Datarate Downlink 
The throughput of the user in the downlink 
Zone 
The name of the target zone 
 
The advantage of this approach relies on its simplicity. From 
a mobile operator’s point of view, being able to customize the 
network to improve both QoS and QoE for a group of users 
provides less complexity than managing users individually. 

 
 
 
(a) Accuracy 
(b) Resource Consumption 
 
 
(c) Execution Time 
 
Fig. 2. Performance Benchmark of NaiveBayes, KNN, RandomForest, J48, SVM, and ZeroR 
 
The fact that there would be always a minority of users to 
not benefit from the changes made in the network represents 
a limitation for this method. 
NSP offers a variety of information. The features used in 
this paper are listed in Table I. As the first step for service 
prediction, determining high-density areas is needed. To this 
end, the Density-based Spatial Clustering of Applications 
with Noise (DBSCAN) [14] can be applied on the raw GPS 
coordinates of UEs. With the appropriate distance function, 
the results of this algorithm are clusters that represent highly 
dense areas. Since we use GPS coordinates, the haversine 
formula can be used as a distance function. The choice of 
this algorithm is mainly motivated by two reasons: i) this 
algorithm does not need to supply the number of clusters 
(i.e., areas) beforehand since this information is not always 
available in real-life scenarios, and ii) the ability to handle the 
noise. Noise points are entries that do not participate in any 
cluster. Indeed, those rogue points could mislead algorithms 
by either changing the center of the area or by mistakenly 
considering isolated points as a highly dense area. 
With the dense areas being determined as per the previous 
phase, the next step consists in creating the prediction model. 
A classification method can be applied to the data set (i.e., 
generated by NSP) whereby the service name feature repre- 
sents the class of the model. To evaluate different classification 
methods, the Waikato Environment for Knowledge Analysis 
(WEKA) [15] is used in this paper. This tool implements 
various machine learning algorithms. Its open source nature 
in addition to its comprehensive JAVA API (i.e., permitting 
its integration into the NSP simulator) are the main reasons 
behind choosing this tool. 
VI. EVALUATION 
A. Classification Algorithms Benchmarking 
In order to select the appropriate classification algorithm 
for this study, a thorough analysis on several algorithms is 
conducted. The considered algorithms are NaiveBayes, K- 
Nearest Neighbors (KNN), RandomForest, J48, SVM, and 
ZeroR. These algorithms are selected for the wide variety of 
families that they represent. Many classifiers require a set of 
parameters. Hereunto, the default and recommended values are 
used. 

The dataset, used to draw the results shown in Figure 2, was 
generated using the simulation parameters detailed in Table 
II and is constituted of more than 67000 instances. Figure 2 
represents the mean values and Confidence Interval (CI) of 
five executions. 
 
TABLE II 
SIMULATION PARAMETERS. 
 
Parameter 
Value 
Number of UEs 
500 
Update Meters 
100 
Number of eNBs per Edge Cloud 
3 
Number of eNBs per Tracking Area 
6 
Number of Edge Clouds 
10 
Number of Drone Homes 
5 
Number of Drones Per Home 
2 
Range 
5000M 
Number of Weather Devices 
10 
Number of Air Pollution Devices 
10 
Number of Parking Devices 
10 
MIME Probability 
20% 
Video Streaming Probability 
30% 
Social Network Probability 
30% 
Drone Delivery Probability 
5% 
Drone Transportation Probability 
5% 
IoT Services Probability 
10% 
Simulation Time 
12H 
 
To evaluate the accuracy of each algorithm, the cross- 
validation technique was used. This technique evaluates the 
model by partitioning the dataset into multiple equally sized 
segments called folds. One sample will be used as a validation 
sample and the rest will be used as training samples. For our 
evaluation, we used a cross-validation with 10 folds. Figure 
2(a) shows the accuracy obtained for each algorithm. From 
the result, the three classifiers KNN, RandomForest and J48 
achieve the highest accuracy rates which are 91.59%, 91.16% 
and 89.4%, respectively. 
Although the accuracy may be an important parameter in 
the choice of a classification algorithm, the resource con- 
sumption as well as the execution time are also important 
factors that need to be taken into account. In this vein, a 
thorough analysis of the resource consumption in terms of 
RAM and CPU usage was conducted and the obtained results 
are illustrated in Figure 2(b). Clearly, RandomForest is the 
most resource-demanding algorithm. Indeed, RandomForest 
consumes roughly four times more RAM and three times 
more CPU than J48 and KNN. In terms of execution time, 
Figure 2(c) illustrates the results obtained. RandomForest still 
exhibits the highest values. On the other hand, KNN is slightly 
superior to J48 with a difference of 0.7 s. From these results, 
we can conclude that KNN is the most suitable classification 
algorithm for our study since it offers a balance between 
accuracy, resource consumption and execution time. 
B. Performance Analysis 
In this section, we perform an analysis on the performance 
of the MEC infrastructure. By integrating the predictor into 
the MEC simulation module, we are able to anticipate the 
service usage and offload the necessary services into the 
EC beforehand. Thus, by comparing the performance under 
scenarios with and without the predictor, we can evaluate 
the gains brought by the anticipation of the service usage. 
To realize such an analysis, we use the parameters presented 
in Table III for the MEC simulation module. Also, several 
simulations were performed. The simulated scenarios share 
the same parameters listed in Table II and the same mobility 
pattern. Since the simulator generates random itineraries for 
UEs, the highly-dense areas change in each simulation, there- 
fore, making the predictor obsolete since it was trained based 
on completely different areas. For this reason, adopting the 
same mobility pattern for all simulations would be a better fit 
to evaluate the performance. Even though they share the same 
parameters, the service usage of UEs changes. However, by 
keeping the overall probabilities of occurrence for each service 
the same, the general behaviors would stay nearly the same. 
 
TABLE III 
PARAMETERS OF THE MEC SIMULATION MODULE. 
 
Parameter 
Value 
Bandwidth 
1GB 
Policy 
First Fit 
Number of VMs Per Edge Cloud 
2 
Host Resource 
16GB RAM, 16 Cores, 1TB Storage 
VM Resource 
8GB RAM, 8 Cores, 500GB Storage 
Application Resource 
1GB RAM, 2 Cores, 2GB Storage 
 
The results obtained by running 10 simulations are pre- 
sented in Figure 3. The results show the mean number of 
events occurred and their respective CI. Figure 3(a) shows the 
results related to the Offloading events. Two types of events are 
shown, namely the success of the offloading operation and its 
failure. The failure occurs when there are not enough resources 
available in the EC. We recorded 17613 offloading requests, 
when using the module without the predictor. In this case, 
we had 8636 successful offloading operations which represent 
49%. On the other hand, 8977 (51%) offloading operations 
failed. When using the predictor, we experienced 10586 (60%) 
successful operations against 7027 (40%) failed operations. To 
conclude, using the predictor, the performance is enhanced by 
11%. 
Figure 3(b) plots the results obtained for the migration 
events. We had an average of 48 Migration events without 
using the predictor. We then recorded three aborted migrations, 
15 failed migrations, 7 successful migrations, and 23 ongoing 
migrations. On the other hand, by using the predictor, we had 
one aborted migration, 13 failed migrations, 21 successful mi- 
grations and 13 ongoing migrations. By applying the predictor, 
we were able to increase the number of successful migrations 
by 29.17%. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we introduced a new version of the Network 
Slice Planner (NSP), offering new services, and simulating 
MEC related events and resource consumption. Using the valu- 
able information collected from the simulator, we conducted 
a comprehensive study on the implementation of machine 

 
 
 
(a) Offloading Events 
(b) Migration Events 
Fig. 3. Performance of The MEC Infrastructure 
 
learning techniques to improve both the QoS and QoE for the 
end-users. In this vein, a method was proposed based on using 
the clustering algorithm DBSCAN in order to identify highly- 
dense areas, thus allowing to focus on the behavior of a mass 
of users. By adopting supervised learning techniques through 
several algorithms, we were able to predict the prevailing 
mobile services in different areas. A detailed benchmark of 
diverse classifiers was conducted, and KNN was proven to be 
the most suitable algorithm for the envisioned study. 
Once the predictor is trained using the data from NSP, a 
thorough performance analysis of the MEC infrastructure was 
performed. By comparing the events of a rudimentary scenario 
against a scenario implementing the predictor. We noticed 
the gain in terms of performance. Especially, the number 
of successful migration and offloading operations increased 
by 29.17% and 11%, respectively. Overall, this study proved 
the important gain that the system could get from applying 
machine learning techniques, ultimately ensuring a better QoS 
and QoE for end-users. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper was partially supported by the European Unions 
Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Program through the 
MonB5G Project under Grant No. 871780. This work was also 
supported in part by the Academy of Finland 6Genesis project 
under Grant No. 318927 and by the Academy of Finland CSN 
project under Grant No. 311654.
