arXiv:2401.03030v1  [cs.HC]  5 Jan 2024
Exploring Gender Biases in Language Paterns of Human-Conversational
Agent Conversations
WEIZI LIU, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA
With the rise of human-machine communication, machines are increasingly designed with humanlike characteristics, such as gender,
which can inadvertently trigger cognitive biases. Many conversational agents (CAs), such as voice assistants and chatbots, are pre-
dominantly designed with female personas. This leads to concerns about perpetuating gender stereotypes and inequality. Critiques
have emerged regarding the potential objectiﬁcation of females and the reinforcement of gender stereotypes by these technologies.
This research, situated in conversational AI design, aims to delve deeper into the impacts of gender biases in human-CA interactions.
From a behavioral and communication research standpoint, this program focuses not only on perceptions but also the linguistic styles
of users when interacting with CAs, as previous research has rarely explored. It aims to understand how pre-existing gender biases
might be triggered by CAs’ gender designs. It further investigates how CAs’ gender designs may reinforce gender biases and extend
them to human-human communication. The ﬁndings aim to inform the ethical design of conversational agents, addressing whether
gender assignment in CAs is appropriate and how to promote gender equality in design.
CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing →Human computer interaction (HCI); HCI design and evaluation methods;
User studies.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: conversational agent, cognitive biases, gender, UX research
ACM Reference Format:
Weizi Liu. 2023. Exploring Gender Biases in Language Patterns of Human-Conversational Agent Conversations. 1, 1 (January 2023),
5 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
1
INTRODUCTION
Communication between humans and machines is becoming ubiquitous. Designers are making machine agents more
sophisticated with humanlike characteristics and identities (e.g., race, gender, nationality, etc.). Consequently, this can
trigger cognitive biases linked to these attributes. Gender biases stand out as a prominent example. Conversational
agents (CAs), such as voice assistants and text-based chatbots, are predominantly depicted as friendly, obedient, and
submissive females[7]. For example, Siri, Alexa, and Cortana were primarily or by default female-voiced [6]; Samsung’s
virtual assistant is embodied in a female avatar. The gendered technological design has sparked public and scholarly
criticism. UNESCO warned about sexism in technology[25]; critical scholars also argued that “gendered” technologies
could exacerbate female objectiﬁcation, gender stereotypes, and gender power imbalance in the era of artiﬁcial intelli-
gence [2][21]. Besides critiques, more empirical research is needed to examine how such technology design penetrates
our daily lives, cultivates norms, and gradually shapes culture. A potential concerning consequence could be that if
users come to expect female CAs to be submissive—despite their intended role as equal collaborators—this perception
could become normalized in daily interactions. Over time, this might inadvertently encourage users to adopt a more

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or

© 2023 Association for Computing Machinery.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
1

2
Weizi Liu
dominant stance towards women in real-world scenarios. Situated in conversational AI design, I propose a working
research program [15] to explore the gender biases in human-CA communication impacted by CAs that are designed
with gendered humanlike characteristics. With a particular focus on language use in conversations, this research ini-
tiative seeks to understand how users project prevailing gender biases onto gendered CAs in their ways of talking
to them and how such biases might be reinforced through the design of gendered CAs. The ﬁndings of this research
are expected to answer practical questions in conversational design: is a gendered CA appropriate? When would it be
beneﬁcial or detrimental to assign a gender to a CA? Drawing on the observed cognitive and behavioral patterns, how
should we mitigate biases and promote gender equality in CA design?
2
RELATED WORK
Gender biases in technology have raised increasing attention in recent years. Existing research has focused on tackling
gender biases in data and algorithms[4], system design[24], and the reference and representation of participants[5][19],
etc. Not enough work has explored user behavior impacted by gender biases when interacting with technology ex-
tensively. Based on theories in social identity, interpersonal communication, and human-computer interaction, this
research program explores gender biases in user evaluation and communicative behavior in conversations with a gen-
dered CA. Gender and sex roles are important social identities that inﬂuence language use, social perception, and
stereotyping in human communication processes [13][20]. For example, feminine language tends to be aﬃliative and
hedging; masculine language tends to be assertive and commanding. People adjust their communicative behavior to
accommodate or diﬀerentiate themselves from their communication partners (see communication accommodation
theory; [11]), which is salient in gender-based communication [3][17]. In human-computer interaction, researchers
explored how humans automatically apply interpersonal norms to interactions with machines (see “Computers Are
Social Actors” paradigm; [22]), which include gender stereotypes that were reﬂected by credibility and attraction eval-
uations of machines [14][18]. Furthermore, recent scholarship pointed out that human-machine communication may
possess unique characteristics, norms, and social scripts [12][16], which inspires the comparison between the gendered
human-machine communication schema and the interpersonal communication schema.
Early studies based on CASA initiated the exploration of gender eﬀects in human-AI communication. For example,
[14] found that a computer with a female voice was associated with greater attractiveness yet less opinion inﬂuence
than one with a male voice. In more recent research, researchers found the majority of existing chatbot designs are
more female than male[10]. However, users do not seem to show a clear consensus on gender preference and the au-
thors therefore recommended customizing chatbots’ gender for individual users[8]. Besides design concepts and user
attitudes, research on user behavior in human-CA communication has focused on deviant behaviors such as aggression
and abuse toward a female CA [9]. However, gender eﬀects in ordinary and non-extreme user-CA conversations may
have indirect and implicit inﬂuence [1], thus revealing more research opportunities. While the CASA paradigm oﬀers
a general framework, more speciﬁc processes need to be identiﬁed for a fuller understanding of the issue. Moreover,
although existing research on human-CA communication has referred to many interpersonal theories and perspec-
tives, few studies applied interpersonal communication research methods to study human-CA communication. This
research program incorporates dyadic observational methods to observe and compare gender biases from the senti-
ment, dynamics, and interactional patterns in human-CA conversations.

Exploring Gender Biases in Language Patterns of Human-Conversational Agent Conversations
3
3
RESEARCH PLAN
I aim to answer three sets of overarching questions: a) How do gender identities inﬂuence human-CA communication?
Put diﬀerently, do the mere gender identities of a CA alter users’ attitudes and the manner in which users communicate
with the CA? b) What are the diﬀerences between the gendered human-CA communication schema and the gendered
interpersonal communication schema? Are human-CA conversations more gender-neutral or gender-biased? c) How
will gendered human-CA communication inﬂuence subsequent human-human communication processes, more specif-
ically, mitigate or reinforce gender stereotypical perceptions and gendered language use? I propose a mixed-methods
approach to explore the role of gender in human-CA conversations to understand the issue comprehensively. First, I
propose an observational study of unrestricted interactions between human users and a female- or male-voiced CA in a
laboratory and qualitatively analyze the conversations to detect gendered communication cues and patterns, including:
a) gender-linked language use (e.g., aﬃliation, assertiveness, hedges, etc.), b) interactional patterns (e.g., engagement,
interruptions, convergence, divergence, etc.), and c) sentiment (valence, emotions, and tone of voice).
Second, I propose an online experiment aimed at quantifying the patterns identiﬁed in the ﬁrst step. This experiment
will examine how various dyads—comprising a user and a gendered (female, male, or neutral) CA—diﬀer in their ex-
pectations and evaluations of the CA, including factors like credibility and attractiveness. Additionally, the experiment
will assess the language users employ when interacting with the CA. I propose a text analysis on gendered human-CA
chat history using dictionaries such as LIWC (and more advanced natural language processing tools), with a focus on
emotions, tones, femininity, masculinity, power dynamics, etc. The preliminary ﬁndings included many details such
as that users carried over human communication norms and habits to human-machine communication, with females
tending to be more cooperative and detail-oriented and males tending to be less emotional and more concise. A female
CA was preferred as an option and more likely to be anthropomorphized, but was evaluated less favorably than a male
CA, which could possibly be attributed to novelty eﬀect of a male CA and the violation of heightened expectation in a
female CA. Dyads consisting of male users and male CAs exhibited strong rapport, as evidenced by high evaluations,
engagement, and frequent use of power-related language[15].
The ﬁnal step is to examine if communicating with a CA may inﬂuence subsequent human-human interactions, in
other words, if users carry over their communication schema with machines to humans, thus reducing or enhancing
gender biases. One assumption is that if users command a female agent as an assistant and internalize this role, they
may talk less respectfully to females in real life. I plan to design a lab experiment to test users’ attitudes and behavioral
change after interacting with a gender-stereotypical CA (e.g., a female agent as a personal assistant) or a gender
counter-stereotypical CA (e.g., a female agent as a tech expert) in a certain collaborative role. The experiment will be
3 (CA’s gender: female vs. male vs. neutral) * 2 (CA’s role: a personal assistant vs. a tech expert). Participants will be
asked to: a) have a conversation with one of the CAs to complete a task collaboratively, b) evaluate their experience,
and c) chat with a female human agent. I will test how evaluations of the CA, changes in gender-related attitudes, and
communication patterns with the subsequent human agent diﬀer across conditions.
4
DISCUSSION
Given the expected gender biases discovered in human-CA conversations, it is important to consider whether the
advantages of creating a humanlike persona for a conversational agent (CA) are worth the potential risk of perpetuating
biases. One might question whether assigning a gender, especially a female one, should be prohibited due to concerns
about sexualization and biases. This raises the dilemma: shouldwe abandon utilizing positive attributes often associated

4
Weizi Liu
with female identities, like rapport-building and empathy[23]? When incorporating gender identities into design, it
is crucial to be considerate of the context and the relationship dynamics between users and CAs. The innovation of
this research lies in proposing an agenda for theory building of HCI research regarding gender biases and practicing a
dyadic approach from interpersonal communication to study human-AI communication. It elicits extensive discussion
on an important social issue related to gender equality in technology and provides implications for mindful and ethical
conversational AI design.
