Have I done enough planning or should I plan more?
Ruiqi He1, Yash Raj Jain, Falk Lieder
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen

Abstract
People’s decisions about how to allocate their limited computational resources are
essential to human intelligence. An important component of this metacognitive
ability is deciding whether to continue thinking about what to do and move on
to the next decision. Here, we show that people acquire this ability through
learning and reverse-engineer the underlying learning mechanisms. Using a process-
tracing paradigm that externalises human planning, we ﬁnd that people quickly
adapt how much planning they perform to the cost and beneﬁt of planning. To
discover the underlying metacognitive learning mechanisms we augmented a set of
reinforcement learning models with metacognitive features and performed Bayesian
model selection. Our results suggest that the metacognitive ability to adjust the
amount of planning might be learned through a policy-gradient mechanism that is
guided by metacognitive pseudo-rewards that communicate the value of planning.
1
Introduction
Humans are frequently confronted with complex problems that require planning and executing long
sequences of appropriate actions to reach distant goals. A search tree can be used to depict the space
of future actions and consequences. However, such trees grow exponentially as the length of the
sequences increases. While current trends in artiﬁcial intelligence depend on the exponential increase
in computational power, the human mind’s cognitive resources are much more limited. Therefore,
how is it possible that people are nevertheless able to outperform computers on a wide range of
difﬁcult real-world tasks? One critical capacity that enables people to do more with less computation
is meta-reasoning, that is reasoning about reasoning [11]. In the context of planning, this means
making intelligent decisions about when and how to plan and thereby whether and how to allocate
computational resources. In AI research, optimal metareasoning is often regarded to be intractable
[27]. This raises the question of how people are able to solve the apparently intractable metareasoning
problem despite their limited computational resources. One intriguing possibility is that people learn
an approximate solution through trial and error. This idea is known as metacognitive reinforcement
learning [18, 17, 21].
Previous work found that metacognitive reinforcement learning adapts which information people
prioritise in their decisions [15, 13]. By contrast, in this work, we ﬁrst aim to show that people are
able to learn to adjust how much planning they perform to the costs and beneﬁts of planning through
a novel experiment. Then to investigate the underlying metacognitive learning mechanism, we ﬁt the
resulting data from the experiment with models of metacognitive reinforcement learning and their
extensions. We then use Bayesian model selection to test whether human metacognitive learning
relies on value-based or policy-gradient mechanisms, whether it is guided by an internally generated
metacognitive reward signal, and whether there is a separate meta-control mechanism for deciding
when to stop planning. Based on the model selection results, we perform model-based analyses
of what differentiates people who could successfully adapt how much planning they perform from
participants who struggled to adapt.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), Sydney, Australia.
arXiv:2201.00764v1  [cs.AI]  3 Jan 2022

Our new results strengthen the scientiﬁc foundation for recreating in machines an essential metacog-
nitive feature of human intelligence, namely the capacity to efﬁciently allocate limited computational
resources [11]. In addition, our results advance the understanding of how people come to make
rational use of their limited cognitive resources [19]. Concretely, our ﬁndings suggest that this
adaptation is achieved through gradual metacognitive learning.
2
Experiment
To demonstrate that people gradually learn to adapt their amount of planning to its cost and beneﬁts,
we designed an experiment using the Mouselab Markov Decision Process (MDP) paradigm [5].
2.1
The Mouselab MDP paradigm
To externalise people’s amount of planning, we leverage an experimental paradigm that makes
people’s behaviour highly diagnostic of their planning strategies [5]. In this paradigm, participants
plan the route of a spider through a maze with the goal to maximise their score (see Figure 1), which
is the sum of the value of the nodes (grey circles) along the path they chose to traverse. Each node
has a gain or loss that is initially concealed but may be seen by clicking on it. This explicit clicking
motion indicates that the person is judging the quality of a hypothetical future state, which we regard
as an elementary planning operation. The operation’s cognitive cost is externalised by charging a
price that varies depending on the experimental condition. Participants are therefore incentiﬁed to
reveal information based on the cost and reward of planning. In this way, the paradigm externalises
the mental model that people use to plan in terms of which and how many nodes have been clicked.
Figure 1: Screenshot example of one trial of
the Mouselab paradigm for the high reward
variance low click cost condition (HVLC)
with three nodes revealed
Table 1: Experiment settings and correspond-
ing condition abbreviations. Experimental
conditions are the four possible combinations
of two sets of possible range of rewards (high
and low variance) and two levels of planning
costs (high and low)
High reward
variance
Low reward
variance
High click
cost
High variance
High cost condition
(HVHC)
Low variance
High cost condition
(LVHC)
Low click
cost
High variance
Low cost condition
(HVLC)
Low variance
Low cost condition
(LVLC)
2.2
Methods
The experiment was conducted in accordance to study protocol 429/2021BO2 approved by the
Independent Ethics Commission of the Medical Faculty of the University Tübingen.
Materials
Using the Mouselab-MDP paradigm, we created an experiment that independently varies
the beneﬁt and the cost of planning across four conditions (see Table 1). We manipulated the beneﬁt of
planning by deﬁning two sets of available rewards. One set contains a large range of available rewards
(i.e., the rewards are drawn uniformly from the set {-1000, -100, -50, 50, 100}), whereas in the
other set, the difference between the available rewards is small (i.e., the rewards are drawn uniformly
from the set {-6, -4, -2, 2, 4, 6}). We denote the conditions using the set with large differences as
high-variance conditions and the conditions using set with small differences low-variance conditions.
In addition, we manipulated the cost of planning by setting the click cost to either −5 (high-cost) or
−1 (low-cost).
Participants and procedure
We recruited 208 participants on CloudResearch, that is 52 partic-
ipants for each condition. The recruitment was limited to participants who had completed 100+
2

Human Intelligence Tasks (HIT), had HIT approval rate of at least 90% [6], and were located in
the United States. The participants were randomly assigned to one of the four conditions and were
given minimal instructions followed by a quiz to test their correct understanding. After passing the
quiz, participants were asked to complete 35 trials of planning in the Mouselab-MDP paradigm.
Participants could earn a performance-dependent bonus up to $5 in addition to their base-pay of
$1.50 The scores are displayed on the screen and are updated after each click or move. Participants
were informed that they would receive 0.2 cents for each point of their ﬁnal score after completing all
trials. The average bonus participants received was $1.79 in the HVHC condition, $2.08 in the HVLC
condition, $0.02 in the LVHC condition, and $0.10 in LVLC condition. The HIT took on average 14
minutes. 1 We excluded 15 participants (7%) from the analysis because they did not engage in any
planning (clicking) in any of the trials.
2.3
Results
To examine whether people adapt the amount of planning to its cost and beneﬁts, we analysed their
number of clicks as the decision to click corresponds to a decision to plan more because additional
planning is necessary to get any beneﬁt out of the additional information. We hypothesised that in
each condition participants would gradually learn to adapt the amount of planning they perform.
Concretely, we predicted that in high-variance conditions the number of clicks would increase over
time because the large range of possible rewards makes planning unusually beneﬁcial and at the same
time causing not planning to be very costly. By contrast, in low-variance conditions planning is less
beneﬁcial and therefore the number of clicks should decrease. Furthermore, we predicted that people
would adapt to the high cost of planning by reducing their number of clicks more strongly when the
beneﬁt of planning is low and increasing it less strongly when the beneﬁt of planning is high.
To test our hypotheses, we ﬁrst visually examined the click development across the trials. Figure
2 shows the averaged number of clicks across participants for all four conditions. The number of
clicks increased signiﬁcantly in the high-variance conditions, where planning is highly beneﬁcial,
and decreased signiﬁcantly in the low-variance conditions, where planning is less beneﬁcial. A
signiﬁcant Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA showed that the four groups differed in how much they planned
(S = 14.66, p = .002). Pair-wise Wilcoxon rank sum tests comparing the average numbers of clicks
suggested signiﬁcant differences between the low-variance conditions (S = −6.79, p < .0001), the
high-cost conditions (S = 7.18, p < .0001) and the low-cost conditions (S = 7.14, p < .0001) but
not for the high-variance conditions (S = 0.21, p = .83). These results as well as the box plot (see
Figure 3) suggest that people do learn to rationally adapt their amount of planning to its cost and
beneﬁt. In addition, the beneﬁt of planning in the high-variance conditions by far outweighs the cost
of planning and therefore the participants learn to plan more regardless of the costs, whereas the
cost of planning makes a difference in the low-variance conditions, where the beneﬁt of planning is
already marginal and the beneﬁts could easily be outweighed by the costs.
3
Modelling metacognitive learning
Having shown that people do learn to adapt their amount of planning, we then model the underlying
metacognitive learning mechanism by applying reinforcement learning algorithms to the problem
of deciding how much to plan (meta-decision-making) [2, 11]. We now brieﬂy introduce these two
frameworks and how they can be combined.
3.1
Background
3.1.1
Reinforcement learning
According to previous work, human learning is driven by incentives and punishments received
through trial and error [22]. Reinforcement learning algorithms are based on this learning mechanism
as they learn to estimate how much reward may be expected from taking a particular action a in a
given state s. This estimate is updated according to the differences between received and predicted
rewards δ, the reward prediction errors:
Q(s, a) ←Q(s, a) −α · δ
(1)
1The experiment can be tested here: http://planning-amount.herokuapp.com.
3

(a) HVHC condition. Mann Kendall test suggests in-
creasing trend (S = 237, p < .001). Average number
of clicks: 5.58;
(b) HVLC condition. Mann Kendall test suggests
increasing trend (S = 429, p < .0001). Average
number of clicks: 5.69
(c) LVHC condition. Mann Kendall test suggests de-
creasing trend (S = −473, p < .0001). Average
number of clicks: 0.64
(d) LVLC condition. Mann Kendall test suggests de-
creasing trend (S = −287, p < .0001). Average
number of clicks in the LVLC condition: 2.59
Figure 2: Averaged click development of all participants and of the ﬁtted model (REINFORCE with
metacognitive pseudo-rewards)
Figure 3: Box plot of participants’ numbers of clicks for all four conditions.
where Q denotes the Q-value [32] and α is the learning rate. To strike a compromise between
exploitation and exploration, the agent can pick its actions probabilistically, maximising the predicted
action value, for example using the softmax rule [33]:
P(a|s, Q) ∝exp(1/τ · Q(s, a))
(2)
where τ is the inverse temperature parameter.
3.1.2
Meta-decision-making
According to previous research, the brain is equipped with multiple decision systems that interact in
a variety of ways [8, 7]. The model-based system, in contrast to Pavlovian and model-free systems,
allows for ﬂexible reasoning about which action is preferable but demands a process for deciding
which information should be considered in a given decision. Therefore, an important part of deciding
how to decide is to efﬁciently balance decision quality and decision time given a huge amount of
information. This is known as meta-decision-making [2]. Recent work has formalised the problem of
meta-decision-making as a meta-level MDP [17, 11]:
Mmeta = (B, C ∪{⊥}, Tmeta, rmeta) , Qmeta(b, c) ←Qmeta(b, c) −α · δmeta
(3)
4

where belief states bt ∈B encode the model-based decision system’s beliefs about the values of
alternative courses of actions. The temporal evolution of those belief states (b1, b2, · · · ) is driven by
the decision system’s computations c1, c2, · · · according to the meta-level transition probabilities
T(bt, ct, ct+1). Finally, the meta-level reward function rmeta(bt, ct) encodes the cost of performing
the planning operation ct ∈C and the expected return of terminating planning (ct = ⊥) and acting
based on the current belief state bt. This meta-level MDP can for example by solved by applying
meta Q-learning, that is Qmeta(b, c).
3.1.3
Metacognitive reinforcement learning
Planning strategies can be viewed as policies for resolving MDPs at the metalevel. Hence, the problem
of identifying efﬁcient planning methods can be formalised as solving a metalevel MDP for the best
metalevel policy [11]. Although it is often computationally hard to solve meta-decision-making
problems optimally, the best solution can be approximated by reinforcement learning [27, 3]. As a
result, we assume that the brain approximates optimal meta-decision-making through reinforcement
learning mechanisms that attempt to approximate the optimal solution of the meta-level MDP deﬁned
in Equation 3 by either learning to approximate the optimal policy directly [13] or learning an
approximation to its value function [15]. Previous research has used this concept to describe how
people learn to choose between different cognitive strategies [9, 24, 18], how many steps to plan ahead
[17], when to exercise how much cognitive control [21] and how people learn which information
to consider [13]. This approach, however, has yet to be applied to the study of how people develop
and reﬁne their cognitive strategies with respect to how much information to consider for planning
depending on its cost and beneﬁt.
3.2
Models of metacognitive reinforcement learning
To examine the underlying metacognitive learning mechanism, we build on previous work on metacog-
nitive reinforcement learning According to [15], a value-based RL model called the Learned Value
of Computation (LVOC) model seems to be able to explain how people learn planning strategies
reasonably well. On the other hand, work by [13] suggests that people’s adaptation of their planning
strategy to different environment structures might follow a policy-gradient mechanism called REIN-
FORCE that is additionally supported by internally generated metacognitive rewards for generating
valuable information. Furthermore, work by [15] suggests that human planning might be controlled
by two sequential meta-control decisions about whether planning should be continued (Stage 1) and,
if so, which planning operation should be performed next (Stage 2). To examine which mechanism,
value-based or policy-gradient reinforcement learning, best explains how people learn how much to
plan, we test existing models of those mechanisms on our new data. In addition, we extend both the
value-based and policy-gradient models by adding internally generated metacognitive rewards for
generating valuable information as well as hierarchical approaches. 2
3.2.1
Representations of the planning strategies
Our models represent people’s planning strategies as softmax policies operating on a weighted
combination of 52 neuroscientiﬁcally informed features (see Appendix A.1). One example of a group
of features is pruning features [14], which are related to assigning a negative value to think about a
path whose expected value is below a certain threshold. With this representation, a person’s learning
trajectory can be described as a time series of the weight vectors that represent the person’s planning
strategies in terms of those features.
3.2.2
REINFORCE model
According to the REINFORCE model [15], which is based on the REINFORCE algorithm [33],
people change their planning strategy directly by updating their softmax policy (see Equation 2).
After each decision, the weight vector θ is updated in the direction of the gradient of the difference
between its the returns of its choices and the cost of the performed planning operations:
θ ←θ + α ·
O
X
t=1
γt−1 · rmeta(bt, ct) · ∇θ ln πθ(ct|bt),
(4)
2The code accompanying this work can be found here https://github.com/Reeche/planningamount.
5

where b represents the belief state, c the click under consideration, Cb the set of clicks available in
belief state b, α the learning rate, γ the discount factor, f the above-mentioned features and O is
the number of planning operations executed by the model on that trial. The learning rate α was
optimised using ADAM [16]. Next to the initial weight vector θ, the REINFORCE model has three
free parameters: α, γ and inverse temperature τ that are ﬁt separately for each participant.
3.2.3
LVOC model
According to the LVOC model, people identify and adjust their strategy continuously by learning to
anticipate the values of alternative planning operations [17]. This is achieved by approximating the
meta-level Q-function by a linear combination of the features mentioned above:
Qmeta(bk, ck) ≈
52
X
j=1
wj · fj(bk, ck),
(5)
The weights of those features are learned by Bayesian linear regression of the bootstrap estimate
ˆQ(bk, ck) of the meta-level value function onto the features f:
ˆQ(bk, ck) = rmeta(bk, ck) + ⟨µt, f(b′, c′)⟩
(6)
The sum of the immediate meta-level reward and the anticipated value of the future belief state b′
under the present meta-level policy is the bootstrap estimate in Equation 6. The predicted value
of b′ is the scalar product of the the posterior mean µt of the weights w given the observations
from all preceding planning operations and the features f(b′, c′) of b′ and the cognitive operation c′
that the current policy picks given state. A generalised variant of Thompson sampling selects the
next planning operation c′ based on the posterior on the feature weights w. That means, to make
the kth meta-decision, n weight vectors ˜w1, · · · , ˜wn are sampled from the posterior distribution of
the weights given the series of meta-level states, selected planning operations, and resulting value
estimates encountered so far:
˜w(1)
k , · · · , ˜w(n)
k
∼P(w|Ek),
(7)
where the set Ek = {e1, · · · , ek} contains the meta-decision-maker’s experience from the ﬁrst k
meta-decisions. To be precise, each meta-level experience ej ∈Ek is a tuple

bj, hj, ˆQ(bj, cj; µj)

containing a meta-level state, the computation selected in it, and the bootstrap estimates of its Q-
value. The arithmetic mean of the sampled weight vectors ˜w(1), · · · , ˜w(n) is then used to predict the
Q-values of each potential planning operation c ∈C according to Equation 5. The model then either
exploits what it has learned so far by choosing the planning operation with the highest predicted
Q-value or explores a random planning operation with probability p. The LVOC model therefore has
the following free parameters: p, the mean vector µprior and variance σ2
prior of its prior distribution
N(w; µprior, σ2 · I) on the weights w, and the number of samples n.
3.2.4
Metacognitive features
We augmented the REINFORCE and LVOC models with two components: metacognitive rewards
for generating valuable information and a two-stage hierarchical meta-decision-making process.
Metacognitive rewards for generating valuable information
Because of the central role of re-
ward prediction errors in reinforcement learning [28, 10] and the scarcity of external rewards in
metacognitive reinforcement learning [12], we postulate that the brain might accelerate this learning
process by generating additional metacognitive pseudo-rewards that convey the value of the informa-
tion generated by the just performed planning operation. Concretely, the value of the pseudo-reward
for performing computation ct in belief state bt and transitioning to belief state bt+1 is:
PR(bt, c, bt+1) = E[Rπbt+1|bt+1] −E[Rπbt|bt+1],
(8)
which is the difference between the expected value of the best path in belief state bt+1 according to
the policy πbt+1 and the expected value of the best path in belief state bt+1 according to the behaviour
policy πbt (e.g., moving along the path up-up-right through the environment shown in Figure 1)
which is deﬁned as
πb(s) = argmax
a
Eb[R|s, a]
(9)
where R is the sum of the external rewards (e.g., the sum of rewards collected by moving through the
maze) and the expected value is taking with respect to the probability distribution encoded by b.
6

Hierarchical meta-control
Previous research suggests that foraging decisions are made by two
distinct decision systems: the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex
[26]. Since determining how and how much to plan is similar to foraging for information, it might
also rely on two separate systems [15]. We therefore, developed an extension to the LVOC and
REINFORCE models that ﬁrst decides whether to continue planning (Stage 1) and then selects the
next planning operation according to either the LVOC model or the REINFORCE model (Stage 2).
Stage 1 utilises an adaptive satisﬁcing stopping rule [4], which adjusts the satisﬁcing threshold based
on the number of clicks made through a free parameter η. The smaller η the more likely it is to
terminate planning. The hierarchical approach therefore, introduced one additional free parameter η
to the base models LVOC and REINFORCE.
3.3
Model ﬁtting methods
The resulting 8 different models were assessed on how well they can capture how people learn
how much to plan. For that, we ﬁtted each model’s free parameters to the participant’s data and
applied each model to the series of problems the participant had to solve. The parameters were ﬁt
by maximising a multivariate-Normal pseudo-likelihood function deﬁned in terms of the probability
that the model would generate the participant’s trial wise number of clicks c as a function of its
parameters: For a given participant i, the pseudo-likelihood function under model m is given by:
L ((θi,m, σi,m)|ci) = φ(ci;ˆci,m(θ), σi,mI)
(10)
where θi,m is the parameter vector used to ﬁt the data from participant i with model m, ci is
the vector of number of clicks that the ith participant performed on trials 1 through 35, σ is the
standard deviation of the errors between the observed number of clicks and the model’s predictions
ˆci,m(θi,m), and φ(x; µ, Σ) is the density function of the multivariate normal distribution. We estimate
the parameters θi,m and σi,m by maximising the pseudo-likelihood function in Equation 10 using
Bayesian Optimisation [1]. All 8 combinations of the LVOC and REINFORCE models, that is
with or without pseudo-reward and hierarchical as well as non-hierarchical variants are then ﬁt to
the participant data using 400 iterations. In each iteration, the model’s prediction is estimated by
averaging the model’s scores across 30 simulations.
3.4
Model selection
After the model-ﬁtting, we performed model selection using the Bayesian information criterion (BIC)
[29] and Bayesian model selection. Concretely, we use random effects Bayesian model selection
[25, 31] at the group level to estimate the expected proportion of people that are best described by
a given model (r) and the so-called exceedance probability φ that this proportion is signiﬁcantly
higher than the corresponding proportion for any other model. In addition, we perform family-level
Bayesian model selection to draw the equivalent inferences for sets of models that share a common
feature [23]. In general, REINFORCE models appear to be superior to LVOC models with 137 out
of 193 participants best explained by REINFORCE variants according to the BIC. Bayesian model
selection on a model-family level supported this conclusion by suggesting that approximately 77.35%
of the population can be best described by REINFORCE models and this proportion is higher than
the proportion of people that are best described by any of the other models (φ > 99%). In addition,
our data suggested that models with and without pseudo-rewards are about equally good at explaining
metacognitive learning (rPR = 49.63%, φPR = 46.91%). Furthermore, most participants’ learning
behaviour did not support the hierarchical meta-control mechanism (rHR = 41.40%, φHR = 1.63%).
For more details, see Tables 3, 5, 6, and 7 in Appendix A.2.1.
According to Bayesian model selection at the level of individual models, we can be 95% conﬁdent that
the REINFORCE model with pseudo-rewards explains the learning behaviour of a greater proportion
of people than any of the alternative models (r = 25.10%, φ = 88.07%; see Table 2). Counting the
number of participants best ﬁtted by a given model according to the BIC corroborated this conclusion.
The REINFORCE model with pseudo-reward also had the lowest average BIC value (i.e., 142.91).
The ﬁts for the participants of the REINFORCE model with pseudo-rewards are shown in Figure 2.
Details as well as the ﬁgures of the averaged performance of all the other models can be found in
Table 4, Figures 11 and Figures A.2.2 in the appendix. Some shortcomings of the model are for
example the ﬂat increase in the number of clicks at the beginning of the HVHC condition, the lower
click amount level in HVLC condition and a steeper decrease in the number of clicks in the LVHC
condition.
7

Table 2: Results of Bayesian model selection comparing all 8 combinations of the models and
metacognitive features, namely the vanilla LVOC model (LVOC), the LVOC model that uses pseudo-
rewards (LVOC-PR), the LVOC model with hierarchical meta-control (HR-LVOC), the hierarchical
LVOC model that uses pseudo-rewards (HR-LVOC-PR), and the corresponding variants of the
REINFORCE model (RF).
LVOC
LVOC-PR
HR-LVOC
HR-LVOC-PR
RF
RF-PR
HR-RF
HR-RF-PR
Proportion (r)
7.44%
7.74%
6.24%
2.31%
18.13%
25.10%
14.87%
18.17%
Exceedance prob. (φ)
0%
0%
0%
0%
5.62%
88.07%
0.61%
5.70%
3.5
Model-based analysis
Participants differed in their ability to adapt their amount of planning. To investigate those differences,
we divided them into three groups: participants in the high-variance conditions whose number
of clicks signiﬁcantly increased according to Mann Kendall tests of trend or participants in the
low-variance conditions whose number of clicks signiﬁcantly decreased are classiﬁed as highly
adaptive, participants with signiﬁcantly decreasing numbers of clicks in the high-variance conditions
and participants with signiﬁcantly increasing numbers of clicks in the low-variance conditions are
classiﬁed as maladaptive, and the other participants are classiﬁed as moderately adaptive. To gain
insights into the learning processes of each group, we performed a model-based analysis using the
REINFORCE model with pseudo-reward as it best explained a larger proportion of participants’ data
than the alternative models.
We hypothesised that maladaptive participants would have different learning rates than the other
two groups and tested this hypothesis using Wilcoxon rank-sum tests on the ﬁtted learning rates.
For the condition with low reward variance and low click cost, the maladaptive learners had an
average learning rate of 0.025, while the highly adaptive learners had an average learning rate of
0.006 and the moderately adaptive learners had an average learning rate of 0.010. The tests implied
that the distribution of the ﬁtted learning rate differs signiﬁcantly between maladaptive and highly
adaptive participants (M = 2.02, p = .04) as well as between maladaptive and moderately adaptive
participants (M = 2.34, p = .02). The high learning rates of maladaptive learners might have
manifested in the high volatility of their average number of clicks shown in the appendix Figure 11.
This suggests that their high learning rates might have led to overshooting the target and oscillating
back and forth between suboptimal extremes. Bonferroni corrected Wilcoxon rank-sum tests did not
show any other statistically signiﬁcant ﬁndings for any of the other model parameters or conditions.
4
Conclusion and further work
Meta-control over decision-making is an important aspect of human metacognition. To investigate
how such metacognitive decisions are shaped by learning, we measured how people adapt how much
they plan to its costs and beneﬁts and then modelled the underlying learning mechanisms in terms of
metacognitive reinforcement learning. Using a process-tracing method, we found that the amount of
planning, deﬁned in the number of clicks, increased signiﬁcantly in conditions, where planning is
highly beneﬁcial and decreased signiﬁcantly in conditions, where planning is less beneﬁcial. The cost
of clicking also had a signiﬁcant effect in the less beneﬁcial conditions as participants planned more
when the cost is low and planned less when the cost of planning is high. After having conﬁrmed that
people learned to adapt their amount of planning depending on its cost and beneﬁts, we proceeded
to test a set of metacognitive reinforcement learning models enhanced by metacognitive features.
Model selection using BIC and Bayesian model selection suggests that participants might rely on a
policy-gradient mechanism that generates its own metacognitive pseudo-rewards. In addition, high
learning rates was discovered to be one potential source of maladaptiveness.
In summary, our ﬁndings suggest that the metacognitive decision of whether to do more planning
is partly made through metacognitive reinforcement learning from past experience. This ﬁnding
provides additional support to the emerging view that metacognitive reinforcement learning plays an
important role in people’s metacognitive ability to adapt their decision strategies to the requirements
of their environment [15, 18, 21, 17]. This suggests that developing metalevel reinforcement learning
algorithms [12, 3, 20] is a promising avenue to recreating this ability in machines. This work
mainly focused on the amount of planning externalised by the number of clicks. Future work should
investigate which model best predicts which planning operations people perform (cf. [13]).
8
