arXiv:1603.03515v2  [cs.AI]  12 Nov 2016
Near-Optimal Active Learning of Halfspaces via Query Synthesis in the Noisy
Setting
Lin Chen1,2 and Hamed Hassani3 and Amin Karbasi1,2
1Department of Electrical Engineering, 2Yale Institute for Network Science, Yale University
3Computer Science Department, ETH Zürich

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the problem of actively learning a
linear classiﬁer through query synthesis where the learner can
construct artiﬁcial queries in order to estimate the true deci-
sion boundaries. This problem has recently gained a lot of in-
terest in automated science and adversarial reverse engineer-
ing for which only heuristic algorithms are known. In such
applications, queries can be constructed de novo to elicit in-
formation (e.g., automated science) or to evade detection with
minimal cost (e.g., adversarial reverse engineering). We de-
velop a general framework, called dimension coupling (DC),
that 1) reduces a d-dimensional learning problem to d−1 low-
dimensional sub-problems, 2) solves each sub-problem efﬁ-
ciently, 3) appropriately aggregates the results and outputs a
linear classiﬁer, and 4) provides a theoretical guarantee for
all possible schemes of aggregation. The proposed method
is proved resilient to noise. We show that the DC frame-
work avoids the curse of dimensionality: its computational
complexity scales linearly with the dimension. Moreover, we
show that the query complexity of DC is near optimal (within
a constant factor of the optimum algorithm). To further sup-
port our theoretical analysis, we compare the performance of
DC with the existing work. We observe that DC consistently
outperforms the prior arts in terms of query complexity while
often running orders of magnitude faster.
1
Introduction
In contrast to the passive model of supervised learn-
ing, where all the labels are provided without any in-
teractions with the learning mechanism, the key insight
in active learning is that the learning algorithm can
perform signiﬁcantly better if it is allowed to choose
which data points to label. This approach has found far-
reaching applications, including the classical problems
in AI (e.g., classiﬁcation (Tong and Koller 2002), infor-
mation retrieval (Tong and Chang 2001), speech recogni-
tion (Hakkani-Tur, Riccardi, and Gorin 2002)) as well as
the modern ones (e.g., interactive recommender systems
(Karbasi, Ioannidis, and Massoulie 2012) and optimal deci-
sion making (Javdani et al. 2014)). In all the above applica-
tions, the unlabeled data are usually abundant and easy to
obtain, but training labels are either time-consuming or ex-
pensive to acquire (as they require asking an expert).
Throughout this paper, our objective is to actively learn
an unknown halfspace H∗= {x ∈Rd ∶⟨h∗,x⟩> 0}
via query synthesis (a.k.a. membership queries), where
⟨⋅,⋅⟩denotes the standard inner product of the Euclidean
space and h∗is the unit normal vector of the halfspace
we want to learn. We would like to note that learning
the halfspace H∗is mathematically equivalent to learning
its unit normal vector h∗; therefore we focus on learning
h∗hereinafter. In addition, it should be noted that using
the kernel trick we can easily extend the halfspace learn-
ing to more complex (e.g., non-linear) decision boundaries
(Shawe-Taylor and Cristianini 2004).
The hypothesis space H, which consists of all possibilities
of unit normal vectors, is the unit sphere Sd−1 = {x ∈Rd ∶
∥x∥= 1}, where ∥⋅∥denotes the standard Euclidean norm.
In active learning of halfspaces via query synthesis, the
algorithm is allowed to query whether any point x in Rd
resides in the true halfspace. When the algorithm queries
x, the true outcome is sign(⟨h∗,x⟩) ∈{1,−1}. When
sign(⟨h∗,x⟩) = 1, it means that x ∈H∗; otherwise, x ∉H∗.
We should note here that the only information we obtain
from a query is the sign of the inner product rather than the
value. For example, the queries of the form sign(⟨h∗,ei⟩),
where ei is the ith standard basis vector, will only reveal the
sign of the ith component of h∗(and nothing further about
its value).
In the noiseless setting, we observe the true outcome of
the query, i.e. sign⟨h∗,x⟩∈{1,−1}. In the noisy setting, the
outcome is a ﬂipped version of the true sign with indepen-
dent ﬂip probability ρ. That is, denoting the outcome by y
we have y ∈{−1,1} and Pr[y ≠sign⟨h∗,x⟩] ≜ρ < 1/2.
Since the length of the selected vector x will not affect
the outcome of the query, we only query the points on the
unit sphere Sd−1 = {x ∈Rd ∶∥x∥= 1}. Hence, we term
X = Sd−1 as the query space.
Given ǫ,δ > 0, we would like to seek an active learning al-
gorithm that (i) adaptively selects vectors x1,x2,... ∈X, (ii)
observes the (noisy) responses to each query sign⟨h∗,xi⟩,
(iii) and outputs, using as few queries as possible, an esti-
mate ˆh of h∗such that ∥ˆh −h∗∥< ǫ with probability at least
1 −δ.
Our main contribution in this paper is to develop a
noise resilient active learning algorithm that has access
to noisy membership queries. To the best of our knowl-
edge, we are the ﬁrst to show a near-optimal algorithm
that outperforms in theory and practice the naive repe-

tition mechanism and the recent spectral heuristic meth-
ods (Alabdulmohsin, Gao, and Zhang 2015). Speciﬁcally,
we develop a framework, called Dimension Coupling (DC),
with the following guarantees. Its query complexity is
O(d(log 1
ǫ + log 1
δ )) and its computational complexity is
O(d(log 1
ǫ + log 1
δ )2). In particular, in the noiseless setting
(ρ = 0), both its computational complexity and query com-
plexity are O(dlog 1
ǫ). Note that in both settings the com-
putational complexity scales linearly with the dimension.
Moreover, the query complexity in both settings is near-
optimal. Our empirical experiments demonstrate that DC
runs orders of magnitude faster than the existing methods.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2,
we start with investigating this problem in the 2-dimensional
case and present an algorithm called DC2. Then in Section 3
we generalize it to the d-dimensional case and present a gen-
eral framework called DC. Empirical results are shown in
Section 4. We extensively review related literature in Sec-
tion 5.
2
DC2: Solving the 2-Dimensional Problem
To gain more intuition before studying the general d-
dimensional problem, it might be beneﬁcial to study a spe-
cial case where the dimension is two. In other words, we
study in this section how to learn the normalized pro-
jection of the true unit normal vector h∗
∈
Rd onto
span{e1,e2}, where e1,e2 ∈Rd are two orthonormal vec-
tors and span{e1,e2} is the linear subspace spanned by e1
and e2. We should note here that the underlying space is still
d-dimensional (i.e., Rd) but our goal is not to learn h∗per se
but its normalized projection onto a 2-dimensional subspace.
Formally, given two orthonormal vectors e1,e2 we denote
the (normalized) projection of h∗onto span{e1,e2} by h⊥,
i.e.,
h⊥=
⟨h∗,e1⟩e1 + ⟨h∗,e2⟩e2
∥⟨h∗,e1⟩e1 + ⟨h∗,e2⟩e2∥2
.
(1)
Our objective is to ﬁnd a unit vector ˆe ∈span{e1,e2} such
that ∥ˆe −h⊥∥< ǫ. In fact, we require the latter to hold with
probability at least 1 −δ.
We should emphasize that noise, characterized by inde-
pendent ﬂip probability ρ, is generally present. In the 2-
dimensional problem, one may propose to use the sim-
ple binary search (a detailed discussion with examples is
presented in Appendix B) to ﬁnd a unit vector ˆe that re-
sides ǫ-close to h⊥. To make it noise-tolerant, when the
binary search algorithm queries a point, say xi, we query
it R times to obtain R noisy versions of sign ⟨h∗,xi⟩
and view the majority vote of the noisy versions as the
true outcome (Kääriäinen 2006; Karp and Kleinberg 2007;
Nowak 2011). We call this method repetitive querying.
However, its query complexity is O(log(1/ǫ)(loglog(1/ǫ)+
log(1/δ)), which is suboptimal both theoretically (we will
prove this bound in Appendix C) and empirically (referred
to as REPETITIVE-DC in Section 4).
As a result, instead, we will present a Bayesian algorithm
termed DC2 that solves this 2-dimensional problem with
query complexity O(log(1/ǫ) + log(1/δ)). Recall that any
unit vector inside span{e1,e2}, e.g., h⊥, can equivalently be
Algorithm 1 DC2
Input: orthonormal vectors e1,e2, estimation error at most
ǫ, success probability at least 1 −δ.
Output: a unit vector ˆe which is an estimate for the nor-
malized orthogonal projection of h∗onto span{e1,e2}.
1: Set p0(h) to be uniform, i.e., ∀h ∈S1 ∶p0(h) = 1/2π.
2: for m = 1 to Tǫ,δ do
3:
Find a vector xm ∈S1 which is a solution to the fol-
lowing equation: ∫S1 sign ⟨x,h⟩pm−1(h)dh = 0. If
there are multiple solutions, choose one arbitrarily.
4:
Ask from the oracle the value of sign⟨xm,h∗⟩.
5:
Based on the response obtained from the oracle, up-
date the distribution pm−1(h) to pm(h).
6: end for
7: return ˆe = arg maxh∈S1 pTǫ,δ(h).
represented as a pair (c1,c2) on the two-dimensional unit
circle S1 (e.g., h⊥= c1e1+c2e2 and c2
1 +c2
2 = 1). To simplify
notation, we use a point (c1,c2) ∈S1 and its corresponding
unit vector c1e1 + c2e2 interchangeably. In this setting, it is
easy to see that for any x ∈span{e1,e2}
sign⟨x,h∗⟩= sign⟨x,h⊥⟩.
(2)
We take a Bayesian approach. In the beginning, when no
queries have been performed, DC2 assumes no prior infor-
mation about the vector h⊥. Therefore, it takes the uniform
distribution on S1 (with pdf p0(h) =
1
2π) as its prior belief
about h⊥. After performing each query, the posterior (belief)
about h⊥will be updated according to the observation. We
let pm(h) denote the (pdf of the) posterior after perform-
ing the ﬁrst m queries. In this manner, DC2 runs in total of
Tǫ,δ rounds, where in each round a speciﬁc query is selected
and posed to the oracle. The number Tǫ,δ will be speciﬁed
later (see Theorem 1). Upon the completion of round Tǫ,δ,
the algorithm returns as its ﬁnal output a vector ˆe ∈S1 that
maximises the posterior pdf pTǫ,δ(h). If there are multiple
such maximisers, it picks one arbitrarily. We now proceed
with a detailed description of DC2 (a formal description is
provided in Algorithm 1).
As shown in Algorithm 1, at each round, say round m+1,
the algorithm maintains and updates the distribution pm that
encodes its current belief in the true location of h⊥. We
should note here that these distributions can be stored ef-
ﬁciently and as a result the vector xm+1 can be computed
efﬁciently. Indeed, (the pdf of) pm is piecewise constant on
the unit circle (see Figure 1). More precisely, at any round
m, there are at most 2m points u1,u2,⋯,u2m that are or-
dered clock-wise on the unit-circle and pm is constant when
restricted to each of the sectors [ui,ui+1). The piecewise
constant property of the pdf of pm can be established by
induction on m. Recall that the initial distribution p0 is uni-
form and thus piecewise constant. The Bayesian update step
(line 5 of Algorithm 1) preserves this property when the al-
gorithm updates the distribution pm(h) to pm+1(h). We will
show why this is true when we discuss the Bayesian update
step in detail.

At round m + 1, in order to ﬁnd xm+1 (see line 3 of Algo-
rithm 1), DC2 ﬁrst ﬁnds a line that passes through the centre
of S1 and cuts S1 into two “halves” which have the same
measure with respect to pm. Note that ﬁnding such a line
can be done in O(m) steps because pm has the piecewise
constant property. Once such a line is found, it is then easy
to see that xm+1 can be any of the two points orthogonal
to the line. As a result, DC2 at round m + 1 can ﬁnd xm+1
in O(m) operations. We denote the half-circle containing
xm+1 by R+ and the other half by R−. We refer to Figure 1
for a schematic illustration.
The key step in Algorithm 1 is the Bayesian update (line
5). Once a noisy response to the query sign ⟨xm+1,h∗⟩is
obtained (line 4)), the probability distribution pm will be
updated to pm+1 in the following way. First, consider the
event that the outcome of sign⟨xm+1,h∗⟩is +1. We have
pm(sign⟨xm+1,h∗⟩= +1) = (1−ρ) pm(R+)+ρ pm(R−) =
1/2, and similarly pm(sign ⟨xm+1,h∗⟩= −1) = 1/2. There-
fore, by Bayes theorem we obtain the following update rules
for pm+1. If we observe that sign ⟨xm+1,h∗⟩= +1, then for
h ∈R+ we have
pm+1(h) = 2(1 −ρ)pm(h)
and for h ∈R−we have
pm+1(h) = (2ρ)pm(h).
Also, if we observe that sign⟨xm+1,h∗⟩= −1, then for h ∈
R+ we have
pm+1(h) = (2ρ)pm(h)
and for h ∈R−we have
pm+1(h) = 2(1 −ρ)pm(h).
Note that the factor of 2 here is due to the normalization.
It is easy to verify that pm+1 is also a piecewise constant
distribution (now on 2(m + 1) sectors; see Figure 1).
Theorem 1 shows that after Tǫ,δ = O(log 1
ǫ + log 1
δ )
rounds, with probability at least 1 −δ, DC2 outputs a unit
vector ˆe ∈span{e1,e2} such that ∥ˆe −h⊥∥< ǫ. Also, as
discussed above, the computational complexity of DC2 is
O(T 2
ǫ,δ), i.e., O((log 1
ǫ + log 1
δ )2).
Theorem 1. (Proof in Appendix A) When the independent
ﬂip probability is ρ, having
Tǫ,δ ≥M + max{T0,T1,T2,T3} = O(log 1
ǫ + log 1
δ )
(3)
is sufﬁcient to guarantee that DC2 outputs with probabil-
ity at least 1 −δ a vector that is within a distance ǫ of h⊥.
Here, we have M = ⌈
2 log 2
δ
−log(4ρ(1−ρ))⌉, T0 =
8 log 2
δ
log(2(1−ρ)), T1 =
8 log
1
8πǫ
log(2(1−ρ)), T2 =
8
log(2(1−ρ)) (log(2M) + log(
4
log(2(1−ρ))))
and T3 =
24ρ log2 1−ρ
ρ
log2(2(1−ρ)) (log(M) + log( 4
δ )).
We would like to remark that when the independent ﬂip
probability ρ is 0 (i.e., in the noiseless case), the algorithm
DC2 reduces to the binary search. If we let Tǫ,δ = ⌈log2
π
ǫ ⌉,
then DC2 outputs a vector that is within a distance ǫ of
Figure 1: Upon the completion of round m (left ﬁgure), the distri-
bution (pdf of) pm is constant over each of the sectors [ui,ui+1). In
the next round (right ﬁgure), in order to ﬁnd xm+1, DC2 ﬁrst ﬁnds
a diagonal line (red line) which separates two half-circles (R+ and
R−) that each has measure 1/2 w.r.t pm. The vector xm+1 will then
be one of the two points on the unit circle that are orthogonal to
this line. For updating pm to pm+1, we note that all the points in-
side R+ get the same factor (either 2ρ or 2(1 −ρ) depending on
the outcome of the query). The same is true for R−. Thus, pm+1 is
again a piecewise constant pdf but now on 2(m + 1) sectors.
h⊥. We present a detailed discussion with examples in Ap-
pendix B.
A few comments are in order: The above guarantee for
DC2 holds with probability one and thus the parameter δ
is irrelevant in the noiseless setting. Furthermore, during
each round of DC2, the distribution pm can be represented
by only two numbers (the starting and ending points of the
sector Rm), and the vector xm can be computed efﬁciently
(it is the orthogonal vector to the midpoint of Rm). There-
fore, assuming one unit of complexity for performing the
queries, DC2 can be implemented with complexity O(Tǫ,δ),
i.e., O(log(1/ǫ)).
3
Dimension Coupling Based Framework
In Section 2, we devise an algorithm, called
DC2
(e1,e2,ǫ,δ), that takes as input two orthonormal vec-
tors e1,e2, uses noisy responses to queries of the form
sign⟨x,h∗⟩, and outputs with probability at least 1−δ a vec-
tor ˆe with the following three properties:
ˆe ∈span{e1,e2},∥ˆe∥= 1,∥ˆe −
⟨h∗,e1⟩e1+⟨h∗,e2⟩e2
∥⟨h∗,e1⟩e1+⟨h∗,e2⟩e2∥∥< ǫ.
In other words, the unit vector ˆe is within a distance ǫ
to the (normalized) projection of h∗onto the subspace
span{e1,e2}. In the current section, we explain a framework
DC that estimates h∗using at most d−1 calls to DC2 (a for-
mal description will be given in Algorithm 2 later).
Let us begin our discussion with a motivating example.
Let {e1,e2,... ,ed} be an orthonormal basis of Rd. Suppose
that h∗has the form h∗= ∑d
i=1 ciei, where {ei}d
i=1 is an arbi-
trarily chosen orthonormal basis for Rd. We assume w.l.o.g.
that h∗is normalized (i.e., ∑d
i=1 c2
i = 1). Our objective is
then to learn the coefﬁcients {ci}d
i=1 within a given precision
by using the noisy responses to the selected sign queries.
The key insight here is that this task can be partitioned in

ˆh = DC2(ˆe12, ˆe34)
ˆe12 = DC2(e1,e2)
e1
e2
ˆe34 = DC2(e3,e4)
e3
e4
(a) Scheme 1: a balanced full binary tree
ˆh = DC2(ˆe123,e4)
ˆe123 = DC2(ˆe12,e3)
ˆe12 = DC2(e1,e2)
e1
e2
e3
e4
(b) Scheme 2: an unbalanced full binary tree
Figure 2: Two possible divide-and-conquer schemes for a 4-
dimensional problem. Each scheme can be represented by a
full binary tree of 4 leaf nodes.
a divide-and-conquer fashion into many smaller tasks, each
involving a few dimensions. The ﬁnal answer (the values of
{ci}d
i=1) will then be obtained by aggregating the answers of
these subproblems.
Example 1. Assume h∗= c1e1 + c2e2 + c3e3 + c4e4, where
ei’s are the standard basis vectors for R4. Deﬁne
e12 = c1e1 + c2e2
√
c2
1 + c2
2
, e34 = c3e3 + c4e4
√
c2
3 + c2
4
Note here that e12 is the (normalized) orthogonal projection
of h∗onto span{e1,e2} and e34 is the (normalized) orthogo-
nal projection of h∗onto span{e3,e4}. Consider the follow-
ing procedure to learn h∗: ﬁrst ﬁnd out what e12 and e34 are,
and then use the relation h∗=
√
c2
1 + c2
2e12 +
√
c2
3 + c2
4e34
to ﬁnd h∗based on the orthonormal vectors e12,e34. By
this procedure, the original “four-dimensional” problem has
been broken into three “two-dimensional” problems.
This procedure is illustrated in Figure 2a. We ﬁrst call
DC2(e1,e2) to obtain an estimate ˆe12 for e12; then we call
DC2(e3,e4) to obtain an estimate ˆe34 for e34; ﬁnally we call
DC2(ˆe12, ˆe34) to obtain an estimate ˆh for h∗.
Example 2. For another example of the 4-dimensional
problem discussed in Example 1, let us consider another
scheme illustrated in Figure 2b: We call DC2(e1,e2) and
obtain ˆ
e12 as an estimate for e12; then call DC2(ˆe12,e3) and
obtain ˆe123 that estimates the normalized orthogonal projec-
tion h∗onto span{e1,e2,e3}; ﬁnally call DC2(ˆe123,e4) and
obtain an estimate for h∗which we denote by ˆh.
Examples 1 and 2 show two possibilities of divide-and-
conquer schemes for a 4-dimensional problem. In fact, each
scheme corresponds to a full binary tree of 4 leaf nodes.
For general d, the idea is similar: We break the problem
into at most d −1 “two-dimensional” problems that each
can be solved efﬁciently. Again, each divide-and-conquer
scheme corresponds to a full binary tree of d leaf nodes.
Consider the decomposition h∗= ∑d
i=1 ciei. Without loss
of generality, suppose that the ﬁrst two leaf nodes to be com-
bined are e1 and e2. We can write
h∗=
d
∑
i=1
ciei = ˆc12
c1e1 + c2e2
√
c2
1 + c2
2
+
d
∑
i=3
ciei,
(4)
where in the last step we have taken ˆc12 ≜
√
c2
1 + c2
2. Now,
note that c1e1+c2e2
√
c2
1+c2
2
is the normalized orthogonal projection
of h∗onto span{e1,e2}. Hence, by using DC2 (e1,e2,ǫ,δ)
we can obtain, with probability at least 1−δ, a good approxi-
mation ˆe12 (within a distance ǫ) of this projection. Therefore,
for small enough ǫ we have h∗≈ˆc12ˆe12 + ∑d
i=3 ciei. Since
h∗is now expressed (approximately) in terms of d −1 or-
thonormal vectors {ˆe12,e3,e4,... ,ed}, we have effectively
reduced the dimensionality of problem from d to d −1. The
idea is then to repeat the same procedure as in (4) to the
newly obtained representation of h∗. Hence, by repeating
this procedure d −1 times in total we will reach a vector
which is the ﬁnal approximation of h∗.
We present this general method in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 Dimension Coupling (DC)
Input: an orthonormal basis E = {e1,e2,... ,ed} of Rd.
Output: a unit vector ˆh which is an estimate for h∗.
1: for j ←1 to d −1 do
2:
Replace any two vectors e′ and e′′ in E with the vec-
tor DC2 (e′,e′′,ǫ,δ).
3: end for
4: Let ˆh be the only remaining vector in E.
5: return ˆh
Theorem 2. (Proof in Appendix D) For DC (outlined in
Algorithm 2) and any of its divide-and-conquer scheme rep-
resented by a full binary tree, we have:
1. DC will call the two-dimensional subroutine DC2 d −1
times.
2. Provided that the output of DC2 is with probability 1 −δ
within distance ǫ of the true value and ǫ ≤5/18, DC en-
sures an estimation error of at most 5ǫ(d −1) with prob-
ability at least 1 −δ(d −1).
As a result of Theorem 2, if we desire the framework DC
to estimate h∗within distance ˜ǫ and with probability at least
1 −˜δ, then it is enough to ﬁx the corresponding parameters
of DC2 to ǫ =
˜ǫ
5(d−1) and δ =
˜δ
d−1.

Theorem 2 indicates that DC requires O(d(log 1
ǫ +log 1
δ ))
queries, since each call to DC2 needs O(log 1
ǫ + log 1
δ )
queries. Recall that the computational complexity of DC2
is O((log 1
ǫ + log 1
δ )2). Hence, DC has computational com-
plexity O(d(log 1
ǫ +log 1
δ )2). As a special case, if in absence
of noise, both the query complexity and time complexity of
DC are O(dlog 1
ǫ).
4
Empirical Results
In this section, we extensively evaluate the performance of
DC against the following baselines:
RANDOM-SAMPLING: Queries are generated by sam-
pling uniformly at random from the unit sphere Sd−1.
UNCERTAINTY-SAMPLING: Queries are sampled uni-
formly at random from the orthogonal complement of w,
where w is the vector learned by linear SVM.
QUERY-BY-BAGGING: The bag size is set to 20 and 1000
queries are generated at each iteration. The query with the
largest disagreement is picked (Abe and Mamitsuka 1998).
SPECTRAL:
The
version
space
is
approximated
by
the
largest
ellipsoid
consistent
with
all
previ-
ous
query-label
pairs.
Then,
at
each
iteration
a
query is selected to approximately halve the ellipsoid
(Alabdulmohsin, Gao, and Zhang 2015).
REPETITIVE-DC: In the noisy setting, one easy way to
apply DC is to query each point R times and use the majority
rule to determine its label; i.e., the combination of repetitive
querying (Section 2) and the DC framework (Section 3).
Our metrics to compare different algorithms are: a) esti-
mation error, b) query complexity, and c) execution time. In
particular, as we increase the number of queries we measure
the average estimation errors and execution times for all the
baselines (with 90% conﬁdence intervals). By nature, in ac-
tive learning via query synthesis, all data points and queries
are generated synthetically. For all the baselines, we used the
fastest available implementations in MATLAB.
Noiseless setting: Figures 3a and 3b (with dimension
d = 25 and 50, respectively) show that in terms of estima-
tion error, DC outperforms all other baselines, and signiﬁ-
cantly outperforms RANDOM-SAMPLING, UNCERTAINTY-
SAMPLING and QUERY-BY-BAGGING. Note that the esti-
mation errors are plotted in log-scales. In terms of execu-
tion times, we see in Fig. 3c that DC runs three orders
of magnitude faster than other baselines. Training an SVM
at each iteration for RANDOM-SAMPLING, UNCERTAINTY-
SAMPLING and QUERY-BY-BAGGING comes with a huge
computational cost. Similarly, SPECTRAL requires solving a
convex optimization problem at each iteration; thus its per-
formance drastically deteriorates as the dimension increases,
which makes it infeasible for many practical problems.
Noisy setting: We set the noise level to ρ = 0.1 and
compare the performance of DC
against RANDOM-
SAMPLING,
UNCERTAINTY-SAMPLING,
QUERY-BY-
BAGGING,
and
REPETITIVE-DC.
As
mentioned
in
(Alabdulmohsin, Gao, and Zhang 2015), and we have also
observed in our experiments, SPECTRAL does not work
even for small amounts of noise as it incorrectly shrinks
the version space and misses the true linear separator;
therefore it is excluded here. We see again in Figures
3d and 3e (for d = 25 and 50) that DC signiﬁcantly
outperforms all other methods in terms of estimation error.
More precisely, using the same number of queries, the
estimation error of DC is around two orders of magnitude
smaller than other baselines. We can also observe from
these two ﬁgures that DC still runs around 100 times faster
than
RANDOM-SAMPLING,
UNCERTAINTY-SAMPLING,
and QUERY-BY-BAGGING. Clearly, DC has a higher
computational cost than REPETITIVE-DC, as DC per-
forms a Bayesian update after each query. Finally, as we
increase the dimension to d = 1000, RANDOM-SAMPLING,
UNCERTAINTY-SAMPLING, and QUERY-BY-BAGGING be-
come signiﬁcantly slower. Hence, in Figure 3f we only show
how the estimation error (for noise levels ρ = 0.01,0.1,0.2)
decreases for DC and REPETITIVE-DC with more queries.
It can be observed from Figure 3f that consuming the same
number of queries, DC can achieve an estimation error
from one order (when the noise intensity is very small) to
three orders of magnitude (when the noise intensity is 0.2)
smaller than that of REPETITIVE-DC.
5
Related Work
The sample complexity of learning a hypothesis was tra-
ditionally studied in the context of probably approximately
correct (PAC) learning (Valiant 1984). In PAC learning the-
ory, one assumes that a set of hypotheses H along with a
set of unlabeled data points X are given, where each data
point x ∈X is drawn i.i.d. from some distribution D. Clas-
sical PAC bounds then yield the sample complexity (i.e., the
number of required i.i.d. examples) from D to output a hy-
pothesis h ∈H that will have estimation error at most ǫ with
probability at least 1 −δ, for some ﬁxed ǫ,δ > 0. Here, the
estimation error is deﬁned as ǫ = Prx∼D[h(x) ≠h∗(x)],
where h∗is the unknown true hypothesis. In the realizable
case of learning a halfspace, i.e., when h∗∈Rd perfectly
separates the data points into positive and negative labels, it
is known that with ˜O(d/ǫ)1 i.i.d. samples one can ﬁnd a lin-
ear separator with an estimation error ǫ. The main advantage
of using active learning methods, i.e., sequentially querying
data points, is to reduce the sample complexity exponential
fast, ideally to ˜O(dlog(1/ǫ)). In fact, a simple counting ar-
gument based on sphere packing shows that any algorithm
needs Ω(dlog(1/ǫ)) examples to achieve an estimation er-
ror of ǫ (Dasgupta, Kalai, and Monteleoni 2009).
For d = 2 and when the distribution is uniform over the
unit sphere S1 it is very easy to see that the halving or bi-
section leads to ˜O(log(1/ǫ)). By using the same halving
method, one can in principle extend the result to any dimen-
sion d. To do so, we need to carefully construct the version
space (i.e., the set of hypotheses consistent with the queries
and outcomes) at each iteration and then ﬁnd a query that
halves the volume (in the uniform case) or the density (in the
general case if the distribution is known) (Dasgupta 2004).
Finding such a query in high dimension is very challenging.
1 We use the ˜O notation to ignore terms that are logarithmic or
dependent on δ.

Number of Queries
50
100
150
200
Estimation Error
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
Random
Uncertainty
Bagging
Spectral
DC
(a) Noiseless (d = 25)
Number of Queries
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Estimation Error
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
Random
Uncertainty
Bagging
Spectral
DC
(b) Noiseless (d = 50)
Dimension
d = 25
d = 50
Execution Time (sec.)
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
103
104
Random
Uncertainty
Bagging
Spectral
DC
(c) Execution time (noiseless)
Estimation Error
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
Execution Time (sec.)
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
103
Repetitive
DC
Random
Uncertainty
Bagging
(d) Noisy (d = 25)
Estimation Error
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
Execution Time (sec.)
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
103
104
DC
Repetitive
Random
Uncertainty
Bagging
(e) Noisy (d = 50)
Number of Queries
# 104
0
2
4
6
8
10
Estimation Error
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
101
DC (noise = 0.01)
DC (noise = 0.1)
DC (noise = 0.2)
Rep. (noise = 0.01)
Rep. (noise = 0.1)
Rep. (noise = 0.2)
(f) Noisy (d = 1000)
Figure 3: Figures 3a and 3b show the estimation error in the noiseless setting as we increase the number of queries, for d = 25
and 100, respectively. Figure 3c shows the corresponding execution times. Figure 3d and 3e show the scatter plots of the
execution time and the estimation error of different methods for d = 25,50 and the noise level ρ = 0.1. We allow each algorithm
to use a budget of 800 and 1800 queries in Figure 3d and 3e, respectively. Figure 3f presents the estimation error of DC and
REPETITIVE-DC as we increase the number of queries for d = 1000 and noise levels ρ = 0.01,0.1,0.2.
One very successful approach that does not suffer
from
the
aforementioned
computational
challenge
is
pool-based active learning (Settles 2010), where instead
of ideally halving the space, effective approaximations are
performed. Notable algorithms are uncertainty sampling
(Lewis and Gale 1994)
and
query-by-committee (QBC)
(Freund et al. 1997). In fact, our problem is closely re-
lated to learning homogeneous linear separators under
the uniform distribution in the pool-based setting. This
problem is very well understood and there exist efﬁcient
pool-based
algorithms (Balcan, Broder, and Zhang 2007;
Dasgupta, Kalai, and Monteleoni 2005;
Dasgupta and Hsu 2008).
In
particular,
Dasgupta
et
al.
(Dasgupta, Kalai, and Monteleoni 2009)
pre-
sented
an
efﬁcient
perceptron-based
algorithm
that
achieve a near-optimal query complexity. Similar re-
sults can be obtained under log-concave distributions
(Balcan and Long 2013). Most of the pool-based meth-
ods require to have access to
˜O(1/ǫ) number of un-
labeled samples in each iteration or otherwise they
perform
very
poorly
(Balcan, Broder, and Zhang 2007;
Dasgupta, Kalai, and Monteleoni 2009).
This
means
that
in
order
to
have
exponential
guarantee
in
terms of sample complexity, we need to grow the
pool size
exponentially fast
(note
that
there is
no
need
to
store all
of
these
points). Moreover, with
a
few
exceptions
(Awasthi, Balcan, and Long 2014;
Balcan, Beygelzimer, and Langford 2006)
pool-based
learning of linear separators in the noisy setting has been
much less studied and the dependency of sample complexity
on noise is not very well understood.
An attractive alternative to the pool-based framework
is query synthesis where we have access to membership
queries (Angluin 1988)): a learner can request for any unla-
beled data instance from the input space, including queries
that the learner synthesizes from scratch. This way the pool
size limitation is entirely eliminated. In many recent ap-
plications, ranging from automated science (King 2009), to
robotics (Cohn, Ghahramani, and Jordan 1996), and to ad-
versarial reverse engineering (Lowd and Meek 2005), query
synthesis is the appropriate model. For instance, in security-
sensitive applications (e.g., spam ﬁlters and intrusion de-
tection systems) that routinely use machine learning tools,
a growing concern is the ability of adversarial attacks to
identify the blind spots of the learning algorithms. Con-
cretely, classiﬁers are commonly deployed to detect mis-
creant activities. However, they are attacked by adversaries
who generate exploratory queries to elicit information that in
return allows them to evade detection (Nelson et al. 2012).
In this work, we show how an adversary can use active
learning methods by making synthetically de novo queries
and thus identify the linear separator used for classiﬁcation.
We should emphasize that in active learning via synthesized
queries the learning algorithm can query the label of any
points in order to explore the hypothesis space. In the noise-
less setting (if we ignore the dependency of the pool size on
˜O(log(1/ǫ))), one can potentially use the pool-based algo-
rithms (under the uniform distribution). Our main contribu-
tion in this paper is to develop a noise resilient active learn-
ing algorithm that has access to noisy membership queries.

To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to show a
near optimal algorithm that outperforms in theory and prac-
tice the naive repetition mechanism and the recent spectral
heuristic methods (Alabdulmohsin, Gao, and Zhang 2015).
