arXiv:1104.1045v2  [cs.AI]  18 Jul 2012
Tractable Set Constraints
Manuel Bodirsky˚
´Ecole Polytechnique, LIX
(UMR 7161 du CNRS),
91128 Palaiseau, France
Martin Hils
Institut de Math´ematiques de Jussieu
(UMR 7586 du CNRS),
Universit´e Paris Diderot Paris 7, UFR de Math´ematiques,
75205 Paris Cedex 13, France
November 16, 2021
Abstract
Many fundamental problems in artiﬁcial intelligence, knowledge representation, and ver-
iﬁcation involve reasoning about sets and relations between sets and can be modeled as set
constraint satisfaction problems (set CSPs).
Such problems are frequently intractable, but
there are several important set CSPs that are known to be polynomial-time tractable. We
introduce a large class of set CSPs that can be solved in quadratic time. Our class, which we
call EI, contains all previously known tractable set CSPs, but also some new ones that are
of crucial importance for example in description logics. The class of EI set constraints has
an elegant universal-algebraic characterization, which we use to show that every set constraint
language that properly contains all EI set constraints already has a ﬁnite sublanguage with an
NP-hard constraint satisfaction problem.
An extended abstract of the content of this article appeared in the proceedings of IJCAI’11 [BHK11].
1
Introduction
Constraint satisfaction problems are computational problems where, informally, the input consists
of a ﬁnite set of variables and a ﬁnite set of constraints imposed on those variables; the task is
to decide whether there is an assignment of values to the variables such that all the constraints
are simultaneously satisﬁed. Set constraint satisfaction problems are special constraint satisfaction
problems where the values are sets, and the constraints might, for instance, force that one set y
includes another set x, or that one set x is disjoint to another set y. The constraints might also
˚Manuel Bodirsky has received funding from the ERC under the European Community’s Seventh Framework
Programme (FP7/2007-2013 Grant Agreement no. 257039).
1

be ternary, such as the constraint that the intersection of two sets x and y is contained in z, in
symbols px X yq Ď z.
To systematically study the computational complexity of constraint satisfaction problems, it
has turned out to be a fruitful approach to consider constraint satisfaction problems CSPpΓq where
the set of allowed constraints is formed from a ﬁxed set Γ of relations R Ď Dk over a common
domain D. This way of parametrizing the constraint satisfaction problem by a constraint language
Γ has led to many strong algorithmic results [BD06, IMM`10, BK09a, BK07, BK09b], and to many
powerful hardness conditions for large classes of constraint satisfaction problems [Sch78, BKJ05,
Bul03, Bul06, BK09b].
A set constraint language Γ is a set of relations R Ď pPpNqqk where the common domain
D “ PpNq is the set of all subsets of the natural numbers; moreover, we require that each relation
R can be deﬁned by a Boolean combination of equations over the signature [, \, c, 0, and 1, which
are function symbols for intersection, union, complementation, the empty and full set, respectively.
Details of the formal deﬁnition and many examples of set constraint languages can be found in
Section 3. The choice of N is just for notational convenience; as we will see, we could have selected
any inﬁnite set for our purposes. In the following, a set constraint satisfaction problem (set CSP)
is a problem of the form CSPpΓq for a set constraint language Γ. It has been shown by Marriott
and Odersky [MO96] that all set CSPs are contained in NP; they also showed that the largest set
constraint language, which consists of all relations that can be deﬁned as described above, has an
NP-hard set CSP.
Drakengren and Jonsson [DJ98] initiated the search for set CSPs that can be solved in polynomial
time. They showed that CSPptĎ, ||, ‰uq can be solved in polynomial time, where
• x Ď y holds iﬀx is a subset of or equal to y;
• x || y holds iﬀx and y are disjoint sets; and
• x ‰ y holds iﬀx and y are distinct sets.
They also showed that CSPpΓq can be solved in polynomial time if all relations in Γ can be deﬁned
by formulas of the form
x1 ‰ y1 _ ¨ ¨ ¨ _ xk ‰ yk _ x0 Ď y0
or of the form
x1 ‰ y1 _ ¨ ¨ ¨ _ xk ‰ yk _ x0 || y0
where x0, . . . , xk, y0, . . . , yk are not necessarily distinct variables. We will call the set of all relations
that can be deﬁned in this way Drakengren and Jonsson’s set constraint language. It is easy to see
that the algorithm they present runs in time quadratic in the size of the input.
On the other hand, Drakengren and Jonsson [DJ98] show that if Γ contains the relations deﬁned
by formulas of the form
x1 ‰ y1 _ ¨ ¨ ¨ _ xk ‰ yk _ u1 || v1 _ ¨ ¨ ¨ _ uk || vk
the problem CSPpΓq is NP-hard.
Contributions and Outline.
We present a signiﬁcant extension of Drakengren and Jonsson’s
set constraint language (Section 3) whose CSP can still be solved in quadratic time in the input
size (Section 6); we call this set constraint language EI.
Unlike Drakengren and Jonsson’s set
2

constraint language, our language also contains the ternary relation deﬁned by pxXyq Ď z, which is
a relation that is of particular interest in description logics – we will discuss this below. Moreover,
we show that any further extension of EI contains a ﬁnite sublanguage with an NP-hard set CSP
(Section 7), using concepts from model theory and universal algebra. In this sense, we present a
maximal tractable class of set constraint satisfaction problems.
Our algorithm is based on the concept of independence in constraint languages which was
discovered several times independently in the 90’s [Kou01, JB98, MO96] – see also [BJR02, CJJK00];
however, we apply this concept twice in a novel, nested way, which leads to a two level resolution
procedure that can be implemented to run in quadratic time. The technique we use to prove the
correctness of the algorithm is also an important contribution of our paper, and we believe that a
similar approach can be applied in many other contexts; our technique is inspired by the already
mentioned connection to universal algebra.
Application Areas and Related Literature
Set Constraints for Programming Languages.
Set constraints ﬁnd applications in program
analysis; here, a set constraint is of the form X Ď Y , where X and Y are set expressions. Examples
of set expressions are 0 (denoting the empty set), set-valued variables, and union and intersection
of sets, but also expressions of the form fpZ1, Z2q where f is a function symbol and Z1, Z2 are again
set expressions. Unfortunately, the worst-case complexity of most of the reasoning tasks considered
in this setting is very high, often EXPTIME-hard; see [Aik94] for a survey.
More recently, it
has been shown that the quantiﬁer-free combination of set constraints (without function symbols)
and cardinality constraints (quantiﬁer-free Pressburger arithmetic) has a satisﬁability problem in
NP [KR07]. This logic (called QFBAPA) is interesting for program veriﬁcation [KNR06].
Tractable Description Logics.
Description logics are a family of knowledge representation
formalisms that can be used to formalize and reason with concept deﬁnitions. The computational
complexity of most of the computational tasks that have been studied for the various formalisms
is usually quite high. However, in the last years a series of description logics (for example EL,
EL``, Horn-FL0, and various extensions and fragments [KM02, Baa03, BBL05, KRH06]) has
been discovered where crucial tasks such as e.g. entailment, concept satisﬁability and knowledge
base satisﬁability can be decided in polynomial time.
Two of the basic assertions that can be made in EL`` and Horn-FL0 are C1||C2 (there is no C1
that is also C2) and C1 X C2 Ď C3 (every C1 that is C2 is also C3), for concept names C1, C2, C3.
These are EI set constraints, and the latter has not been treated in the framework of Drakengren
and Jonsson. None of the description logics with a tractable knowledge base satisﬁability problem
contains all EI set constraints.
Spatial Reasoning.
Several spatial reasoning formalisms (like RCC-5 and RCC-8) are closely
related to set constraint satisfaction problems. These formalisms allow to reason about relations
between regions; in the fundamental formalism RCC-5 (see e.g. [JD97]), one can think of a region as
a non-empty set, and possible (binary) relationships are containment, disjointness, equality, overlap,
and disjunctive combinations thereof. Thus, the exclusion of the empty set is the most prominent
diﬀerence between the set constraint languages studied by Drakengren and Jonsson in [DJ98] (which
are contained in the class of set constraint languages considered here), and RCC-5 and its fragments.
3

2
Constraint Satisfaction Problems
To use existing terminology in logic and model theory, it will be convenient to formalize constraint
languages as (relational) structures (see e.g. [Hod93]). A structure Γ is a tuple pD; f Γ
1 , f Γ
2 , . . . , RΓ
1, RΓ
2 , . . . q
where D is a set (the domain of Γ), each f Γ
i is a function from Dki Ñ D (where ki is called the
arity of f Γ
i ), and each RΓ
i is a relation over D, i.e., a subset of Dli (where li is called the arity of
RΓ
i ). For each function f Γ
i we assume that there is a function symbol which we denote by fi, and
for each relation RΓ
i we have a relation symbol which we denote by Ri. Constant symbols will be
treated as 0-ary function symbols. The set τ of all relation and function symbols for some structure
Γ is called the signature of Γ, and we also say that Γ is a τ-structure. If the signature of Γ only
contains relation symbols and no function symbols, we also say that Γ is a relational structure. In
the context of constraint satisfaction, relational structures Γ are also called constraint languages,
and a constraint language Γ1 is called a sublanguage (or reduct) of a constraint language Γ if the
relations in Γ1 are a subset of the relations in Γ (and Γ is called an expansion of Γ1).
Let Γ be a relational structure with domain D and a ﬁnite signature τ. The constraint sat-
isfaction problem for Γ is the following computational problem, also denoted by CSPpΓq: given a
ﬁnite set of variables V and a conjunction Φ of atomic formulas of the form Rpx1, . . . , xkq, where
x1, . . . , xk P V and R P τ, does there exists an assignment s: V Ñ D such that for every constraint
Rpx1, . . . , xkq in the input we have that pspx1q, . . . , spxkqq P RΓ?
The mapping s is also called a solution to the instance Φ of CSPpΓq, and the conjuncts of Φ are
called constraints. Note that we only introduce constraint satisfaction problems CSPpΓq for ﬁnite
constraint languages, i.e., relational structures Γ with a ﬁnite relational signature.
3
Set Constraint Languages
In this section, we give formal deﬁnitions of set constraint languages. Let S be the structure with
domain PpNq, the set of all subsets of natural numbers, and with signature t[, \, c, 0, 1u, where
• [ is a binary function symbol that denotes intersection, i.e., [S “ X;
• \ is a binary function symbol for union, i.e., \S “ Y;
• c is a unary function symbol for complementation, i.e., cS is the function that maps S Ď N
to NzS;
• 0 and 1 are constants (treated as 0-ary function symbols) denoting the empty set H and the
full set N, respectively.
Sometimes, we simply write [ for the function [S and \ for the function \S, i.e., we do not
distinguish between a function symbol and the respective function. We use the symbols [, \ and
not the symbols X, Y to prevent confusion with meta-mathematical usages of X and Y in the text.
A set constraint language is a relational structure with a set of relations with a quantiﬁer-free
ﬁrst-order deﬁnition in S. We always allow equality in ﬁrst-order formulas, and the equality symbol
“ is always interpreted to be the true equality relation on the domain of the structure.
Example 1. The ternary relation
␣
px, y, zq P PpNq3 | x [ y Ď z
(
has the quantiﬁer-free ﬁrst-order
deﬁnition z [ px [ yq “ x [ y over S.
4

Theorem 2 (Follows from Proposition 5.8 in [MO96]). Let Γ be a set constraint language with a
ﬁnite signature. Then CSPpΓq is in NP.
It is well-known that the structure pPpNq; \, [, c, 0, 1q is a Boolean algebra, with
• 0 playing the role of false, and 1 playing the role of true;
• c playing the role of ␣;
• [ and \ playing the role of ^ and _, respectively.
To not confuse logical connectives with the connectives of Boolean algebras, we always use the
symbols [, \, and c instead of the usual function symbols ^, _, and ␣in Boolean algebras. To
facilitate the notation, we also write ¯x instead of cpxq, and x ‰ y instead of ␣px “ yq.
We assume that all terms t over the functional signature t[, \, c, 0, 1u are written in (inner)
conjunctive normal form (CNF), i.e., as t “ Űn
i“1
Ůni
j“1 lij where lij is either of the form ¯x or of the
form x for a variable x (every term over t[, \, c, 0, 1u can be re-written into an equivalent term of
this form, using the usual laws of Boolean algebras [Boo47]). We allow the special case n “ 0 (in
which case t becomes 1), and the special case ni “ 0 (in which case Ůni
j“1 lij becomes 0). We refer
to ci :“ tlij | 1 ď j ď niu as an (inner) clause of t, and to lij as an (inner) literal of ci. We say
that a set of inner clauses is satisﬁable if there exists an assignment from V Ñ PpNq such that for
all inner clauses, the union of the evaluation of all literals equals N (this is the case if and only if
the formula t “ 1 has a satisfying assignment).
We assume that all quantiﬁer-free ﬁrst-order formulas φ over the signature t[, \, c, 0, 1u are
written in (outer) conjunctive normal form (CNF), i.e., as φ “ Źm
i“1
Žmi
j“1 Lij where Lij is either
of the form t “ 1 (a positive (outer) literal) or of the form t ‰ 1 (a negative (outer) literal). Again,
it is well-known and easy to see that we can for every quantiﬁer-free formula ﬁnd a formula in this
form which is equivalent to it in every Boolean algebra. We refer to Ci :“ tLij | 1 ď j ď miu as
an (outer) clause of φ, and to Lij as an (outer) literal of Ci. Whenever convenient, we identify φ
with its set of clauses.
4
EI Set Constraints
To deﬁne EI set constraints, we need to introduce a series of important functions deﬁned on the
set of subsets of natural numbers.
Deﬁnition 3. Let
• i: pPpNqq2 Ñ PpNq be the function that maps pS1, S2q to the set t2x | x P S1u Y t2x ` 1 | x P
S2u;
• F be the function that maps S Ď N to the set of ﬁnite non-empty subsets of S;
• G: N Ñ FpNq be a bijection between N and the set of ﬁnite non-empty subsets of N (since
both sets are countable, such a bijection exists);
• e: PpNq Ñ PpNq be deﬁned by
epSq “ tG´1pT q | T P FpSqu ;
5

• ei be the function deﬁned by eipx, yq ÞÑ epipx, yqq.
Deﬁnition 4. Let f : pPpNqqk Ñ PpNq be a function, and R Ď PpNql be a relation.
Then
we say that f preserves R if the following holds:
for all a1, . . . , ak P pPpNqql we have that
pfpa1
1, . . . , ak
1q, . . . , fpa1
l , . . . , ak
l qq P R if ai P R for all i ď k. If f does not preserve R, we also
say that f violates R. We say that f strongly preserves R if for all a1, . . . , ak P pPpNqql we have
that pfpa1
1, . . . , ak
1q, . . . , fpa1
l , . . . , ak
l qq P R if and only if ai P R for all i ď k. If φ is a ﬁrst-order
formula that deﬁnes a relation R over S, and f preserves (strongly preserves) R, then we also say
that f preserves (strongly preserves) φ. Finally, if g : pPpNqql Ñ PpNq is a function, we say that f
preserves (strongly preserves) g if it preserves (strongly preserves) the graph of g, i.e., the relation
␣
px1, . . . , xl, gpx1, . . . , xlqq | x1, . . . , xl Ď N
(
.
Note that if an injective function f preserves a function g, then it must also strongly preserve
g.
Deﬁnition 5. The set of all relations with a quantiﬁer-free ﬁrst-order deﬁnition over S that are
preserved by the operation ei is denoted by EI.
Remark. We will see later (Proposition 35 and Proposition 36) that the class EI is independent
from the precise choice of the operations e and i.
Proposition 12 shows that EI has a large subclass, called Horn-Horn, which has an intuitive
syntactic description. In Section 5 we also present many examples of relations that are from EI
and of relations that are not from EI. Before, we will establish some properties of the functions i
and e.
Fact 6. The mapping i is an isomorphism between S2 and S.
Proof. The mapping i can be inverted by the mapping that sends S Ď N to
`
tx | 2x P Su, tx | 2x`1 P
Su
˘
. It is straightforward to verify that i strongly preserves 0, 1, c, \, [.
We write x Ď y as an abbreviation for x [ y “ x.
Proposition 7. The function e has the following properties.
• e is injective,
• e strongly preserves 1, 0, and [, and
• for x, y, z P PpNq such that x\y “ z, not x Ď y, and not y Ď x, we have that epxq\epyq Ř epzq.
Proof. We verify the properties one by one. Since G is bijective, epxq “ epyq if and only if x and y
have the same ﬁnite subsets. This is the case if and only if x “ y, and hence e is injective. Thus,
to prove that e strongly preserves 1, 0, and [, it suﬃces to check that e preserves 1, 0, and [.
Since G is bijective, we have that GpNq equals the set of all ﬁnite subsets of N, and hence
epNq “ N, which shows that e preserves 1. We also compute epHq “ G´1pFpHqq “ G´1pHq “ H.
Next, we verify that for all x, y P PpNq we have epxq [ epyq “ epx [ yq. Let a P N be arbitrary.
We have a P epxq [ epyq if and only if Gpaq P Fpxq X Fpyq. By deﬁnition of F and since Gpaq is
a ﬁnite subset of N, this is the case if and only if Gpaq P Fpx [ yq. This is the case if and only if
a P epx [ yq, which concludes the proof that e preserves [.
6

We verify that if x \ y “ z, not x Ď y, and not y Ď x, then epxq \ epyq Ř epzq.
First
observe that for all u, v Ď N with u Ď v we have epuq Ď epvq since e preserves [. This implies
that epxq \ epyq Ď epzq. Since x Ę y and y Ę x, there are a, b such that a P x, a R y, b P y,
b R x. Then we have that ta, bu P Fpzq, but ta, bu R Fpxq Y Fpyq. Hence, G´1pta, buq P epzq, but
G´1pta, buq R epxq \ epyq. This shows that epzq ‰ epxq \ epyq.
Note that in particular e preserves Ă, Ď, and ||. Moreover, epcpxqq Ď cpepxqq: this follows from
preservation of ||, since x||cpxq, and therefore epxq||epcpxqq, which is equivalent to the inclusion
above. Both e and i strongly preserve [, 0, and 1, and therefore also ei strongly preserves [, 0,
and 1.
5
Horn-Horn Set Constraints
A large and important subclass of EI set constraints is the class of Horn-Horn set constraints.
Deﬁnition 8. A quantiﬁer-free ﬁrst-order formula is called Horn-Horn if
1. every outer clause is outer Horn, i.e., contains at most one positive outer literal, and
2. every inner clause of positive outer literals is inner Horn, i.e., contains at most one positive
inner literal.
A relation R Ď PpNqk is called
• outer Horn if it can be deﬁned over S by a conjunction of outer Horn clauses;
• inner Horn if it can be deﬁned over S by a formula of the form pc1 [ ¨ ¨ ¨ [ ckq “ 1 where
each ci is inner Horn;
• Horn-Horn if it can be deﬁned by a Horn-Horn formula over S.
The following is a direct consequence of the fact that isomorphisms between Γk and Γ preserve
Horn formulas over Γ; since the simple proof is instructive for what follows, we give it here for the
special case that is relevant here.
Fact 9. Outer Horn relations are preserved by i.
Proof. Let φ be a conjunction of outer Horn clauses with variables V . Let tt0 “ 1, t1 ‰ 1, . . . , tk ‰
1u be an outer clause of φ. Let u, v: V Ñ PpNq be two assignments that satisfy this clause. Let
w: V Ñ PpNq be given by x ÞÑ ipupxq, vpxqq. Suppose that w satisﬁes tj “ 1 for all 1 ď j ď k.
Since i is injective we must have that tj “ 1 for both u and v for 1 ď j ď k, and therefore
neither assignment satisﬁes the negative literals. Hence, u and v must satisfy t0 “ 1. Since i is
an isomorphism between S2 and S, it preserves in particular t0 “ 1, and hence w also satisﬁes
t0 “ 1.
Proposition 10. Inner Horn relations are strongly preserved by e.
Proof. Observe that x\pŮ
j yjq “ 1 is equivalent to x[pŰ
j yjq “ Ű
j yj, which is strongly preserved
by e since e strongly preserves [. This clearly implies the statement.
7

Note that Fact 9 and Proposition 10 imply that ei strongly preserves inner Horn relations. We
later also need the following.
Lemma 11. Let x1, . . . , xk, y1, . . . , yl Ď N, where k ě 1. Then the following are equivalent.
1. epx1q \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ epxkq \ epy1q \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ epylq “ 1.
2. there exists an i ď k such that xi \ pŮ
j yjq “ 1.
3. there exists an i ď k such that epxiq \ pŮ
j epyjqq “ 1.
For k “ 0, we have that Ů
j yjďl “ 1 if and only if Ů
jďl epyjq “ 1.
Proof. For the implication from p1q to p2q, suppose that there is for every i ď k an ai P N such
that ai R Xi :“ xi \ pŮ
j yjq. Let c be G´1`
ta1, a2, . . . , aku
˘
. Then for each i ď k, we have that
c R epxiq \ Ů
jďl epyjq. To see this, ﬁrst observe that ai P Ű
jďl yj [ xi. Therefore, ta1, . . . , aku P
Ű
jďl Fpyjq [ Fpxiq for all i ď k. We conclude that c R epx1q \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ epxkq \ epy1q \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ epylq.
The implication p2q ñ p3q follows directly from Proposition 10. The implication p3q ñ p1q is
trivial. The second statement is a direct consequence of Proposition 10.
Proposition 12. Every Horn-Horn relation is preserved by e and i; in particular, it is from EI.
Proof. Suppose that R has a Horn-Horn deﬁnition φ over S with variables V .
Since R is in
particular outer Horn, it is preserved by i by Fact 9.
Now we verify that R is preserved by e. Let u: V Ñ PpNq be an assignment that satisﬁes
φ. That is, u satisﬁes at least one literal in each outer clause of φ. It suﬃces to show that the
assignment v: V Ñ PpNq deﬁned by x ÞÑ epupxqq satisﬁes the same outer literal. Suppose ﬁrst that
the outer literal is positive; because φ is Horn-Horn, it is of the form x \ y1 \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ yl “ 1 or of the
form y1 \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ yl “ 1, which is preserved by e by Lemma 11.
Now, suppose that the outer literal is negative, that is, of the form x1\¨ ¨ ¨\xk\y1\¨ ¨ ¨\yl ‰ 1
for some k ě 0. We will treat the case k ě 1, the other case being similar. Suppose for contradiction
that vpx1q \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ vpxkq \ vpy1q \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ vpylq “ 1. By Lemma 11, there exists an i ď k such that
upxiq\pŮ
j upyjqq “ 1. But then we have in particular that upx1q\¨ ¨ ¨\upxkq\upy1q\¨ ¨ ¨\upylq “
1, in contradiction to the assumption that u satisﬁes φ.
Examples.
1. The disjointness relation || is Horn-Horn: it has the deﬁnition ¯x \ ¯y “ 1.
2. The inequality relation ‰ is inner Horn: it has the deﬁnition py \ ¯xq [ px \ ¯yq ‰ 1.
3. Using the previous example, the relation tpx, y, u, vq | x ‰ y _ u “ vu can easily be seen to be
Horn-Horn.
4. The ternary relation tpx, y, zq | x X y Ď zu, which we have encountered above, has the Horn-
Horn deﬁnition ¯x \ ¯y \ z “ 1.
5. Examples of relations that are clearly not Horn-Horn: tpx, yq | x \ y “ 1u is violated by e,
and tpx, y, zq | px “ yq _ py “ zqu is violated by i.
8

6. The formula
px [ y ‰ xq
^ px [ y ‰ yq
^ pv “ 1 _ u “ 1 _ x \ y ‰ 1q
is clearly not Horn-Horn.
However, the relation deﬁned by the formula is from EI:
if
px1, y1, u1, u2q und px2, y2, u2, v2q are from that relation, then neither ipx1, x2q Ď ipy1, y2q
nor ipy1, y2q Ď ipx1, x2q. By Proposition 7, peipx1, x2q, eipy1, y1q, eipu1, u2q, eipv1, v2qq satisﬁes
the formula.
There is no equivalent Horn-Horn formula, since the formula is not preserved by i.
7. The formula ppx \ y ‰ 1q _ pu \ v “ 1qq ^ p¯x \ y ‰ 1q ^ px \ ¯y ‰ 1q is not Horn-Horn.
However, it is preserved by e and by i: the reason is that one of its clauses has the negative
literal x \ y ‰ 1, and the conjuncts t¯x \ y ‰ 1u and tx \ ¯y ‰ 1u. Therefore, for every tuple
t P R the tuple eptq satisﬁes x \ y ‰ 1 and is in R as well. By Fact 9, R is preserved by i.
In this case, the authors suspect that there is no equivalent Horn-Horn formula. More gen-
erally, it is an open problem whether there exist formulas that are preserved by e and i, but
that are not equivalent to a Horn-Horn formula.
Proposition 13. Drakengren and Jonsson’s set constraint language only contains Horn-Horn re-
lations.
Proof. For inclusion x Ď y, disjointness ||, and inequality ‰ this has been discussed in the examples.
Horn-Horn is preserved under adding additional outer disequality literals to the outer clauses, so
all relations considered in Drakengren and Jonsson’s language are Horn-Horn.
We prepare now some results that can be viewed as a partial converse of Proposition 12.
Deﬁnition 14. A quantiﬁer-free ﬁrst-order formula φ (in the syntactic form described at the end
of Section 3) is called reduced if if every formula obtained from φ by removing an outer literal is
not equivalent to φ over S.
Lemma 15. Every quantiﬁer-free formula is over S equivalent to a reduced formula.
Proof. It is clear that every quantiﬁer-free formula can be written as a formula φ in CNF and in
the form as we have discussed it after Theorem 2. We now remove successively outer literals as
long as this results in an equivalent formula.
We ﬁrst prove the converse of Fact 9.
Proposition 16. Let φ be a reduced formula that is preserved by i. Then each outer clause of φ is
Horn.
Proof. Let V be the set of variables of φ. Assume for contradiction that φ contains an outer clause
with two positive literals, t1 “ 1 and t2 “ 1. If we remove the literal t1 “ 1 from its clause C, the
resulting formula is inequivalent to φ, and hence there is an assignment s1 : V Ñ PpNq that satisﬁes
none of the literals of C except for t1 “ 1. Similarly, there is an assignment s2 : V Ñ PpNq that
satisﬁes none of the literals of C except for t2 “ 1. By injectivity of i, and since i strongly preserves
9

c, [, \, and 1, the assignment s: V Ñ PpNq deﬁned by x ÞÑ ips1pxq, s2pxqq does not satisfy the
two literals t1 “ 1 and t2 “ 1. Since i strongly preserves c, \, [, none of the other literals in C is
satisﬁed by those mappings as well, in contradiction to the assumption that φ is preserved by i.
Deﬁnition 17. Let V be a set of variables, and s: V Ñ PpNq be a mapping. Then a function from
V Ñ PpNq of the form x ÞÑ epspxqq is called a core assignment.
Lemma 18. For every quantiﬁer-free formula φ there exists a formula ψ such that all inner clauses
are inner Horn, and such that φ and ψ have the same satisfying core assignments. If φ is preserved
by ei, then the set of all satisfying core assignments of ψ is closed under ei.
Proof. Suppose that φ has an outer clause C with a positive outer literal t “ 1 such that t contains
an inner clause c :“ x1 \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ xk \ y1 \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ yl that is not Horn, i.e., k ě 2. Then we replace the
outer literal t “ 1 in φ by k literals t1 “ 1, . . . , tk “ 1 where ti is obtained from t by replacing c by
xi \ y1 \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ yl.
We claim that the resulting formula φ1 has the same set of satisfying core assignments. Observe
that xi \ y1 \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ yl Ď c, and hence ti “ 1 implies t “ 1. An arbitrary satisfying assignment of φ1
satisﬁes either one of the positive outer literals ti “ 1, in which case that observation shows that it
also satisﬁes φ, or it satisﬁes one of the other outer literals of C, in which case it also satisﬁes this
literal in φ. Hence, φ1 implies φ. Conversely, let s be a satisfying core assignment of φ. If s satisﬁes
a literal from C other than t “ 1, then it also satisﬁes this literal in φ1, and s satisﬁes φ1. Otherwise,
s must satisfy t “ 1, and hence spx1q \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ spxkq \ spy1q \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ spylq “ 1. Since s is a core
assignment, Lemma 11 implies that there exists an i ď k such that spxiq \ spy1q \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ spylq “ 1.
So s satisﬁes φ1.
Suppose that φ has an outer clause C with a negative outer literal t ‰ 1 such that t contains an
inner clause c :“ x1 \¨ ¨ ¨\xk \y1 \¨ ¨ ¨\yl that is not Horn, i.e., k ě 2. Then we replace the clause
C in φ by k clauses C1, . . . , Ck where Ck is obtained from C by replacing c with xi \ y1 \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ yl.
We claim that the resulting formula φ1 has the same set of satisfying core assignments. Observe
that x1 \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ xk \ y1 \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ yl ‰ 1 implies that xi \ y1 \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ yl ‰ 1, for every i ď k. The
observation shows that an arbitrary assignment of φ is also an assignment of φ1. Conversely, let s
be a satisfying core assignment of φ1. If s satisﬁes one of the other literals of C other than t ‰ 1,
then s satisﬁes φ. Otherwise, s must satisfy xi \ y1 \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ yl ‰ 1 for all i ď k, and by Lemma 11
we have that s also satisﬁes x1 \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ xk \ y1 \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ yl ‰ 1.
We perform these replacements until we obtain a formula φ1 where all inner clauses are Horn;
this formula satisﬁes the requirements of the ﬁrst statement of the lemma.
To prove the second statement, let u, v: V Ñ PpNq be two satisfying core assignments of φ1.
Since φ1 and φ have the same satisfying core assignments, u and v also satisfy φ. Then the mapping
w: V Ñ PpNq given by x ÞÑ eipupxq, vpxqq is a core assignment, and because ei preserves φ, the
mapping w satisﬁes φ.
Since φ and φ1 have the same core assignments, w is also a satisfying
assignment of φ1, which proves the statement.
Deﬁnition 19. A quantiﬁer-free ﬁrst-order formula φ (in the syntactic form described at the end
of Section 3) is called strongly reduced if every formula obtained from φ by removing an outer literal
does not have the same set of satisfying core assignments over S.
Proposition 20. Let φ be a strongly reduced formula all of whose inner clauses are Horn. If the
set of satisfying core assignments of φ is closed under ei, then φ is Horn-Horn.
10

Proof. Let V be the set of variables of φ. It suﬃces to show that all clauses of φ are outer Horn.
Assume for contradiction that φ contains an outer clause with two positive literals, t1 “ 1 and
t2 “ 1. If we remove the literal t1 “ 1 from its clause C, the resulting formula has strictly less
satisfying core assignments; this shows the existence of a core assignment s1 : V Ñ PpNq that
satisﬁes none of the literals of C except for t1 “ 1.
Similarly, there exists a core assignment
s2 : V Ñ PpNq that satisﬁes none of the literals of C except for t2 “ 1.
By assumption, the
inner clauses of t1 and t2 are Horn.
We claim that the assignment s: V Ñ PpNq deﬁned by
x ÞÑ eips1pxq, s2pxqq does not satisfy the clause C. Since ei strongly preserves inner Horn clauses,
we have that s does not satisfy t1 “ 1 _ t2 “ 1. For the same reasons s does not satisfy any
other literals in C; this contradicts the assumption that the satisfying core assignments for φ are
preserved by ei.
Proposition 21. Let Γ be a ﬁnite set constraint language from EI. Then CSPpΓq can be reduced
in linear time to the problem to ﬁnd a satisfying assignment for a given set of Horn-Horn clauses.
Proof. Let Φ be an instance of CSPpΓq, and let V be the set of variables that appear in Φ. For each
constraint Rpx1, . . . , xkq from Φ, let φR be the deﬁnition of R over S. By Lemma 18, there exists
a formula ψR that has the same satisfying core assignments as φR and where all inner clauses are
Horn; moreover, since φR is preserved by ei, the lemma asserts that the set of all satisfying core
assignments of ψR is preserved by ei. We can assume without loss of generality that ψR is strongly
reduced; this can be seen similarly to Lemma 15. By Proposition 20, the formula ψR is Horn-Horn.
Let Ψ be the set of all Horn-Horn clauses of formulas ψRpx1, . . . , xkq obtained from constraints
Rpx1, . . . , xkq in Φ in the described manner. We claim that Φ is a satisﬁable instance of CSPpΓq
if and only if Ψ is satisﬁable. This follows from the fact that for each constraint Rpx1, . . . , xkq
in Φ, the formulas φR and ψR have the same satisfying core assignments, and that both φR and
ψR are preserved by ei (for ψR this follows from Proposition 12), so in particular by the function
x ÞÑ eipx, xq.
Note that in Proposition 21 we reduce satisﬁability for EI to satisﬁability for a proper subclass of
Horn-Horn set constraints: while for general Horn-Horn set constraints we allow that inner clauses
of negative outer literals are not Horn, the reduction only produces Horn-Horn clauses where all
inner clauses are Horn.
6
Algorithm for Horn-Horn Set Constraints
We present an algorithm that takes as input a set Φ of Horn-Horn clauses and decides satisﬁability
of Φ over S “ pPpNq; \, [, c, 0, 1q in time quadratic to the length of the input. By Proposition 21,
this section will therefore conclude the proof that CSPpΓq is tractable when all relations in Γ are
from EI.
We ﬁrst discuss an important sub-routine of our algorithm, which we call the inner resolu-
tion algorithm. As in the case of Boolean positive unit resolution [DG84] one can implement the
procedure Inner-Res such that it runs in linear time in the input size.
Lemma 22. Let Φ be a ﬁnite set of inner Horn clauses. Then the following are equivalent.
1. Ű Φ “ 1 is satisﬁable over S.
2. Inner-RespΦq from Figure 1 accepts.
11

Inner-Res(Φ)
// Input: A ﬁnite set Φ of inner Horn clauses
// Accepts iﬀŰ Φ “ 1 is satisﬁable
During the entire algorithm:
if Φ contains an empty clause, then reject.
Repeat := true
While Repeat = true do
Repeat := false
If Φ contains a positive unit clause txu then
Repeat := true
Remove all clauses where the literal x occurs.
Remove the literal x from all clauses.
End if
Loop
Accept
Figure 1: Inner Resolution Algorithm.
3. Ű Φ “ 1 has a solution whose image is contained in tH, Nu.
Proof. It is obvious that Ű Φ “ 1 is unsatisﬁable when Inner-RespΦq rejects; in fact, for all inner
clauses c derived by Inner-Res from Φ, the formula c “ 1 is logically implied by Ű Φ “ 1. Conversely,
if the algorithm accepts then we can set all eliminated variables to N and all remaining variables
to H, which satisﬁes all clauses: in the removed clauses the positive literal is satisﬁed, and in the
remaining clauses we have at least one negative literal at the ﬁnal stage of the algorithm, and all
clauses with negative literals at the ﬁnal stage of the algorithm are satisﬁed.
The proof of the previous lemma shows that Ű Φ “ 1 is satisﬁable over S if and only if Ű Φ “ 1
is satisﬁable over the two-element Boolean algebra. As we will see in the following, this holds more
generally (and not only for inner Horn clauses). The following should be well-known, and can be
shown with the same proof as given in [Kop89] for the weaker Proposition 2.19 there. We repeat
the proof here for the convenience of the reader (for deﬁnitions of the notions appearing in the
proof, however, we refer to [Kop89]).
Fact 23. Let t1, t2 be terms over t[, \, c, 0, 1u. Then the following are equivalent:
1. t1 “ 1 ^ t2 ‰ 1 is satisﬁable over the two-element Boolean algebra;
2. t1 “ 1 ^ t2 ‰ 1 is satisﬁable over all Boolean algebras;
3. t1 “ 1 ^ t2 ‰ 1 is satisﬁable in a Boolean algebra.
Proof. Obviously, 1 implies 2, and 2 implies 3. For 3 implies 1, assume that t1 “ 1 ^ t2 ‰ 1 has a
satisfying assignment in some Boolean algebra C. Let c be the element denoted by t2 in C under
this assignment. It is well-known that every element a ‰ 0 of a Boolean algebra is contained in an
ultraﬁlter (see e.g. Corollary 2.17 in [Kop89]). So let U be an ultraﬁlter of C that contains c, and
let f : C Ñ t0, 1u be the characteristic function of U. Then f is a homomorphism from C to the
two-element Boolean algebra that maps c to 0; thus t1 “ 1 ^ t2 ‰ 1 is satisﬁable over t0, 1u.
12

The same statement for t1 “ 1 instead of t1 “ 1 ^ t2 ‰ 1 is Proposition 2.19. in [Kop89].
Fact 23 has the following consequence that is crucial for the way how we use the inner resolution
procedure in our algorithm.
Lemma 24. Let Ψ be a ﬁnite set of inner Horn clauses. Then Inner-RespΨYtx1, . . . , xk, y0, . . . , yluq
rejects if and only if Ű Ψ “ 1 implies that x1 \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ xk \ y1 \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ yl “ 1 over S.
Proof. Ű Ψ “ 1 implies that x1 \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ xk \ y1 \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ yl “ 1 if and only if Ű Ψ “ 1 ^ x1 \
¨ ¨ ¨ \ xk \ y1 \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ yl ‰ 1 is unsatisﬁable over S. By Fact 23, this is the case if and only if
Ű Ψ “ 1 ^ x1 \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ xk \ y1 \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ yl ‰ 1 is unsatisﬁable over the 2-element Boolean algebra,
which is the case if and only if Ű Ψ “ 1 ^ x1 \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ xk \ y1 \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ yl “ 0 is unsatisﬁable over
the two-element Boolean algebra. As we have seen in Lemma 22, this is turn holds if and only if
Inner-RespΨYtx1, . . . , xk, y1, . . . , yluq rejects.
Outer-Res(Φ)
// Input: A ﬁnite set Φ of Horn-Horn clauses
// Accepts iﬀΦ is satisﬁable over pPpNq; [, \, c, 0, 1q
During the entire algorithm:
if Φ contains an empty clause, then reject.
Repeat := true
While Repeat = true do
Repeat := false
Let Ψ be the set of all inner Horn clauses of terms t
from positive unit clauses tt “ 1u in Φ.
If Inner-Res rejects Ψ, then reject.
For each negative literal t ‰ 1 in clauses from Φ
For each inner clause D “ tx1, . . . , xk, y1, . . . , ylu of t
Call Inner-Res on
Ψ Y tx1 “ 1, . . . , xk “ 1, y0 “ 1, . . . , yl “ 1u
If Inner-Res rejects then remove clause D from t
End for
If all clauses in t have been removed, then
Remove outer literal t ‰ 1 from its clause
Repeat := true
End for
Loop
Accept
Figure 2: Outer Resolution Algorithm.
Theorem 25. The algorithm ‘Outer-Res’ in Figure 2 decides satisﬁability for sets of Horn-Horn
clauses in quadratic time.
Proof. We ﬁrst argue that if the algorithm rejects Φ, then Φ has indeed no solution. First note that
during the whole argument, the set of clauses Φ has the same satisfying tuples (i.e. the corresponding
formulas are equivalent): Observe that only negative literals get removed from clauses, and that a
negative literal t ‰ 1 only gets removed from a clause when Inner-Res rejects ΨYtx1 “ 1, . . . , xk “
13

1, y0 “ 1, . . . , yl “ 1u for each inner clause tx1, . . . , xk, y1, . . . , ylu of t. By Lemma 24, if Inner-Res
rejects ΨYtx1 “ 1, . . . , xk “ 1, y0 “ 1, . . . , yl “ 1u then Ψ implies that x1\¨ ¨ ¨\xk\y1\¨ ¨ ¨\yl “ 1.
Hence, the positive unit clauses imply that t “ 1 and therefore the literal t ‰ 1 can be removed
from the clause without changing the set of satisfying tuples. Now the algorithm rejects if either
Inner-Res rejects Ψ or if it derives the empty clause. In both cases it is clear that Φ is not satisﬁable.
Thus, it suﬃces to construct a solution when the algorithm accepts. Let Ψ be the set of all inner
clauses of terms from positive unit clauses at the ﬁnal stage, when the algorithm accepts. For each
remaining negative outer literal tt ‰ 1u and each remaining inner clause D “ tx1, . . . , xk, y1, . . . , ylu
of t there exists an assignment αD from V Ñ PpNq that satisﬁes ΨYtx1\¨ ¨ ¨\xk\y1\¨ ¨ ¨\yl ‰ 1u:
otherwise, by Lemma 24, the inner resolution algorithm would have rejected Ψ Y tx1 “ 1, . . . , xk “
1, y0 “ 1, . . . , yl “ 1u, and would have removed the inner clause D from t. Let D1, . . . , Ds be an
enumeration of all remaining inner clauses D that appear in all remaining negative outer literals.
Write is for the s-ary operation deﬁned by px1, . . . , xsq ÞÑ ipx1, ipx2, . . . , ipxs´1, xsq ¨ ¨ ¨ qq (where
i is as in Fact 6). We claim that s: V Ñ PpNq given by
x ÞÑ ispαD1pxq, . . . , αDspxqq
satisﬁes all clauses in Φ. Let C be a clause from Φ. By assumption, at the ﬁnal stage of the
algorithm, the clause C is still non-empty. Also note that since all formulas in the input were Horn-
Horn, they contain at most one positive literal. This holds in particular for C, and we therefore
only have to distinguish the following cases:
• At the ﬁnal state of the algorithm, C still contains a negative literal t ‰ 1. Since t ‰ 1
has not been removed, there must be a remaining inner clause D “ tx1, . . . , xk, y1, . . . , ylu of
t. Observe that spx1q \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ spxkq \ spy1q \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ spylq “ 1 if and only if αDjpx1q \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \
αDjpxkq \ αDjpy1q \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ αDjpylq “ 1 for all 1 ď j ď s. Hence, and since αDpx1q \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \
αDpxkq \ αDpy1q \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ αDpylq ‰ 1, s satisﬁes t ‰ 1. This shows that s satisﬁes C.
• All negative literals have been removed from C during the algorithm. The positive literal
t0 “ 1 of C is such that the inner clauses of t0 are Horn.
They will be part of Ψ, and
therefore t0 “ 1 is satisﬁed by s. Indeed, by assumption the assignments αDj satisfy Ψ, and
Ψ is preserved by i.
We conclude that s is a solution to Φ. The inner resolution algorithm has a linear time complexity;
the outer resolution algorithm performs at most a linear number of calls to the inner resolution
algorithm, and it is straightforward to implement all necessary data structures for outer resolution
to obtain a running time that is quadratic in the input size.
Combining Proposition 21 with Theorem 25, we obtain the following.
Theorem 26. Let Γ be a ﬁnite set constraint language from EI. Then CSPpΓq can be solved in
quadratic time.
7
Maximality
In this section we show that the class EI is a maximal tractable set constraint language. More
speciﬁcally, let Γ be a set constraint language that strictly contains all EI relations.
We then
14

show that Γ contains a ﬁnite set of relations Γ1 such that already the problem CSPpΓ1q is NP-hard
(Theorem 40).
In our proof we use the so-called universal-algebraic approach to the complexity of constraint sat-
isfaction problems, which requires that we re-formulate set CSPs as constraint satisfaction problems
for ω-categorical structures. For a more detailed introduction to the universal-algebraic approach for
ω-categorical structures, see [Bod12]. A structure Γ with a countable domain is called ω-categorical
if all countable structures that satisfy the same ﬁrst-order sentences as Γ are isomorphic to Γ (see
e.g. [Hod93]). By the theorem of Ryll-Nardzewski, and for countable signatures, this is equivalent
to requiring that every relation that is preserved by the automorphisms1 of Γ is ﬁrst-order deﬁnable
in Γ (see e.g. [Hod93]). The set of all automorphisms of Γ is denoted by AutpΓq.
It is well-known that all countable atomless2 Boolean algebras are isomorphic (Corollary 5.16
in [Kop89]; also see Example 4 on page 100 in [Hod93]); let A denote such a countable atomless
Boolean algebra. Let A denote the domain of A. Again, we use [ and \ to denote join and meet
in A, respectively. Since the axioms of Boolean algebras and the property of not having atoms
can all be written as ﬁrst-order sentences, it follows that A is ω-categorical. A structure B has
quantiﬁer elimination if every ﬁrst-order formula is over B equivalent to a quantiﬁer-free formula.
It is well-known that A has quantiﬁer elimination (see Exercise 17 on Page 391 in [Hod93]). We
will also make use of the following.
Theorem 27 (Corollary 5.7 in [MO96]). A quantiﬁer-free formula is satisﬁable in some inﬁnite
Boolean algebra if and only if it is satisﬁable in all inﬁnite Boolean algebras.
A fundamental concept in the complexity theory of constraint satisfaction problems is the notion
of primitive positive deﬁnitions. A ﬁrst-order formula is called primitive positive (pp) if it is of the
form
Dx1, . . . , xn pψ1 ^ ¨ ¨ ¨ ^ ψmq
where for each i ď m the formula ψi is of the form Rpy1, . . . , ylq or of the form y1 “ y2, and
where R is a relation symbol and y1, y2, . . . , yl are either free variables or from tx1, . . . , xnu. We
say that a k-ary relation R Ď Dk is primitive positive deﬁnable (pp deﬁnable) over a τ-structure Γ
with domain D iﬀthere exists a primitive positive formula φpx1, . . . , xkq with the k free variables
x1, . . . , xk such that a tuple pb1, . . . , bkq is in R if and only if φpb1, . . . , bkq is true in Γ.
Example. The relation tpx, yq P PpNq2 | x Ă yu is pp deﬁnable in pPpNq; S, ‰q where S “
tpx, y, zq | x [ y Ď zu. The pp deﬁnition is Spx, x, yq ^ x ‰ y (the deﬁnition is even quantiﬁer-
free).
Example. The relation tpx1, x2, x3, yq P PpNq4 | x1 [ x2 [ x3 Ď yu is pp deﬁnable in pPpNq; Sq
where S “ tpx, y, zq | x [ y Ď zu. The pp deﬁnition is Du pSpx1, x2, uq ^ Spu, x3, yqq.
When every relation of a structure Γ is preserved by an operation f, then f is called a polymor-
phism of Γ. Note that polymorphisms of Γ also preserve all relations that have a pp deﬁnition in Γ.
The following has been shown for ﬁnite domain constraint satisfaction in [BKJ05]; the easy proof
also works for inﬁnite domain constraint satisfaction.
Lemma 28. Let R be a relation with a primitive positive deﬁnition in a structure Γ. Then CSPpΓq
and the CSP for the expansion of Γ by the relation R are polynomial-time equivalent.
1An isomorphism of a structure Γ with itself is called an automorphism of Γ.
2An atom in a Boolean algebra is an element x ‰ 0 such that for all y with x X y “ y and x ‰ y we have y “ 0.
If a Boolean algebra does not contains atoms, it is called atomless.
15

The following theorem is one of the reasons why it is useful to work with ω-categorical templates
(when this is possible).
Theorem 29 (from [BN06]). Let Γ be an ω-categorical structure. Then R is primitive positive
deﬁnable in Γ if and only if R is preserved by all polymorphisms of Γ.
The previous and the next result together can be used to translate questions about primitive
positive deﬁnability into purely operational questions. Let D be a set, let Opnq be Dn Ñ D, and
let O be Ť8
n“1 Opnq the set of operations on D of ﬁnite arity. An operation π P Opnq is called a
projection if for some ﬁxed i P t1, . . . , nu and for all n-tuples px1, . . . , xnq P Dn we have the identity
πpx1, . . . , xnq “ xi. The composition of a k-ary operation f and k operations g1, . . . , gk of arity n
is the n-ary operation deﬁned by
pfpg1, . . . , gkqqpx1, . . . , xnq
“
f
`
g1px1, . . . , xnq, . . . , gkpx1, . . . , xnq
˘
.
Deﬁnition 30. We say that F Ď O locally generates f : Dn Ñ D if for every ﬁnite subset A of Dn
there is an operation g : Dn Ñ D that can be obtained from the operations in F and projection
maps by composition such that fpaq “ gpaq for all a P A.
Theorem 31 (see [Sze86]). Let F Ď O be a set of operations with domain D. Then an operation
f : Dk Ñ D preserves all ﬁnitary relations that are preserved by all operations in F if and only if
F locally generates f.
In the following, we always consider sets of operations F that contain AutpAq, and therefore
make the following convention. For F Ď O, we say that F generates f P O if F Y AutpAq locally
generates f. We now deﬁne analogs of the operations e and i, deﬁned on A instead of PpNq.
Proposition 32. There is an isomorphism ˜i between A2 and A.
Proof. It is straightforward to verify that A2 is again a countable atomless Boolean algebra.
Motivated by the properties of e described in Lemma 11, we make the following deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 33. Let B and B1 be two arbitrary Boolean algebras with domains B and B1, respec-
tively, and let g : B Ñ B1 be a function that strongly preserves [, 0, and 1. We say that g forgets
unions if for all k ě 1, l ě 0, and x1, . . . , xk, y1, . . . , yl P B we have
epx1q \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ epxkq \ epy1q \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ epylq “ 1
if and only if there exists an i ď k such that xi \ y1 \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ yl “ 1.
Proposition 34.
There exists an injection ˜e: A Ñ A that strongly preserves [, 0, and 1 in A,
and that forgets unions.
Proof. The construction of ˜e is by a standard application of K¨onig’s tree lemma for ω-categorical
structures (see e.g. [Bod12]); it suﬃces to show that there is an injection f from every ﬁnite induced
substructure B of A to A such that f strongly preserves [, 0, and 1, and forgets unions.
So let B be such a ﬁnite substructure of A, and let B be the domain of B.
Let C “
pPpBq; [, \, c, 0, 1q be the Boolean algebra of the subsets of B.
We claim that g : B Ñ PpBq
given by gp1q “ 1 and gpxq “ tz | z ‰ 0 ^ z ĎB xu for x ‰ 1
16

• preserves 0 and 1: this is by deﬁnition;
• preserves [: for x, y P B (including the case that x “ 1 or y “ 1) we have
gpxq [C gpyq “ tz | z ‰ 0 ^ z ĎB x ^ z ĎB yu
“
␣
z | z ‰ 0 ^ z ĎB px [B yq
(
“ gpx [B yq ;
• is injective: if x, y P B such that gpxq “ gpyq, then x ĎB y and y ĎB x, and hence x “ y;
• strongly preserves [: this follows from the previous two items;
• forgets unions: This can be shown analogously to the proof of Lemma 11.
Clearly, there is an embedding h from C into A. Then f :“ hpgq is a homomorphism from B to A
that forgets unions.
Proposition 35.
Let φ be a quantiﬁer-free ﬁrst-order formula over the signature t[, \, c, 0, 1u.
Then e preserves φ over S if and only if ˜e preserves φ over A. Moreover, every operation from
A Ñ A that strongly preserves [, 0, and 1 and forgets unions generates ˜e, and is generated by ˜e.
Proof. Let ¯a be a tuple of elements from A. Clearly, there exists a tuple ¯b of elements from PpNq
such that ¯a and ¯b satisfy the same set ψ of quantiﬁer-free ﬁrst-order formulas; this follows from the
fact that every ﬁnite Boolean algebra is the Boolean algebra of subsets of a ﬁnite set. Now observe
that whether or not the tuple ep¯bq satisﬁes a quantiﬁer-free ﬁrst-order formula φ only depends on
ψ, by Lemma 11. Since ˜e strongly preserves [, 0, and 1, and forgets unions, the same is true for
the quantiﬁer-free ﬁrst-order formulas that hold on ˜ep¯aq. Hence, ˜e preserves φ over A if and only if
e preserves φ over S.
To prove the second part of the statement, we use Theorem 31. Suppose that ¯c and ¯d are tuples
of elements from A that satisfy the same quantiﬁer-free ﬁrst-order formulas. By the equivalent
characterization of ω-categoricity mentioned above, and the fact that A has quantiﬁer-elimination,
there exists an automorphism α of A that maps ¯c to ¯d. By the above observations and Theorem 31,
this implies that all operations that strongly preserve [, 0, and 1, and forget unions generate each
other.
Let rei be the operation px, yq ÞÑ ˜ep˜ipx, yqq. The following can be shown similarly to Proposi-
tion 35.
Proposition 36.
Let φ be a quantiﬁer-free ﬁrst-order formula over the signature t[, \, c, 0, 1u.
Then ei preserves φ over S if and only if rei preserves φ over A. Moreover, every binary operation
g that strongly preserves [, 0, and 1, and forgets unions generates rei, and is generated by rei.
We now give the central argument for the maximal tractability of EI, stated in universal-
algebraic language. We say that an operation from Ak Ñ A depends on the argument i P t1, . . . , ku
if there is no pk´1q-ary operation f 1 such that for all x1, . . . , xk P A
fpx1, . . . , xkq “ f 1px1, . . . , xi´1, xi´1, xi`1, . . . , xkq .
We can equivalently characterize k-ary operations that depend on the i-th argument by requiring
that there are x1, . . . , xk P A and x1
i P A such that
fpx1, . . . , xkq ‰ fpx1, . . . , xi´1, x1
i, xi`1, . . . , xkq .
17

Theorem 37. Let f be an operation generated by treiu. Then either tfu generates rei, or f is
generated by t˜eu.
Proof. To show the statement of the theorem, let f be a k-ary operation generated by treiu. For the
sake of notation, let x1, . . . , xl be the arguments on which f depends, for l ď k. Let f 1 : Al Ñ A be
the operation given by f 1px1, . . . , xlq “ fpx1, . . . , xl, . . . , xlq. Clearly, f 1 must be injective (since it
is generated from an injective operation and depends on all arguments). Since f 1 is generated by
rei it preserves [, 0, 1, and since f 1 is injective, it also strongly preserves those functions.
Consider ﬁrst the case that l “ 1, i.e., f 1 is unary. If for all ﬁnite subsets of A, the operation f 1
equals an automorphism of A, then f is generated by AutpAq and there is nothing to show. So as-
sume otherwise; that is, assume that there is a ﬁnite set S Ď A such that there is no a P AutpAq with
f 1pxq “ apxq for all x P S. We claim that f 1 forgets unions. To see this, let u1, . . . , um, v1, . . . , vn
be from A such that f 1pu1q \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ f 1pumq \ f 1pv1q \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ f 1pvnq “ 1. Since f 1 is generated by
t ˜eiu, there is a term composed from automorphisms of A and rei such that f 1pxq “ T pxq for all
x P S Y tu1, . . . , um, v1, . . . , vnu. By the choice of S, this term cannot be composed of automor-
phisms alone, and hence there must be a P AutpAq and operational terms T1, T2 composed from
automorphisms of A and rei such that f 1pxq “ apreipT1pxq, T2pxqqq for all x P S. As rei forgets unions,
there exists an i ď k such that T1puiq \ T1pv1q \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ Tlpvnq “ 1. Since T1 strongly preserves [ we
conclude that there exists an i such that ui \ v1 \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ vn “ 1 (see the proof of Proposition 10),
which is what we wanted to show. By Proposition 35 it follows that f 1 is generated by ˜e. But then
f is generated by ˜e as well.
Next, consider the case that l ą 1.
Let g be the binary operation deﬁned by gpx, yq “
f 1px, y, . . . , yq; since f 1 is injective, the operation g will also be injective, and in particular de-
pends on both arguments, and strongly preserves 0, 1, and [. We claim that g forgets unions.
Let u1 “ pu1
1, u2
1q, . . . , um “ pu1
m, u2
mq, v1 “ pv1
1, v2
1q, . . . , vn “ pv1
n, v2
nq be from A2 such that
gpu1q\¨ ¨ ¨\gpumq\gpv1q\¨ ¨ ¨\gpvnq “ 1. Since g is generated by rei and cannot be generated by
the automorphisms of A alone, there is a term of the form T px, yq “ apreipT1px, yq, T2px, yqqq where
• a P AutpAq,
• T1 and T2 are operational terms composed from automorphisms of A and rei,
• gpx, yq “ T px, yq for all px, yq P tu1, . . . , um, v1, . . . , vnu.
Since rei forgets unions, there exists an i ď k such that T1puiq \ T1pv1q \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ T1pvnq “ 1 and
T2puiq \ T2pv1q \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ T2pvnq “ 1. Suppose ﬁrst that T1 depends on both arguments. Then T1
deﬁnes an injective operation and strongly preserves [. It follows that ui \ v1 \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ vn “ 1 in
A2 since these equations are inner Horn. We can argue similarly if T2 depends on both arguments,
and in those cases we have established that g forgets unions. Suppose now that each of T1 and
T2 does not depend on both arguments.
Consider ﬁrst the case that T1 only depends on the
ﬁrst argument. Then the function x ÞÑ T1px, xq is injective and strongly preserves [, and from
T1puiq \ T1pv1q \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ T1pvnq “ 1 we derive as above that u1
i \ v1
1 \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ v1n “ 1 holds in A.
In this case, T2 must depend on the second argument, since T depends on both arguments. We
therefore also have that u2
i \ v2
1 \ ¨ ¨ ¨ \ v2n “ 1 holds in A. The situation that T1 only depends on
the second argument and T2 only depends on the ﬁrst argument is analogous. So g forgets unions.
By Proposition 36, g generates rei. Consequently, also f generates rei.
18

Deﬁnition 38. Let U, I Ď A3 be the following relations
U :“tpx, y, zq | px \ y “ zqu
I :“tpx, y, zq | px [ y “ zqu
Note that both U and I are preserved by ˜i. The following demonstrates that when Γ has the
polymorphism ˜i, this does not suﬃce for tractability of CSPpΓq.
Proposition 39. Let Γ be the structure with domain A and three relations U, I, and ‰. Then
CSPpΓq is NP-hard.
Proof. The proof is by reduction from 3SAT. We compute from a given 3SAT instance Φ with
variable set V an instance Ψ of CSPpΓq (in polynomial time) as follows. There are distinguished
variables t and f in Ψ. For each variable x of Φ there are two variables xt and xf in Ψ. For a
clause C :“ tl1, l2, l3u of Φ (with literals li either of the form x or of the form ␣x) we create a
fresh variable uC, and add the constraints Upv1, v2, uCq and UpuC, v3, tq where vi :“ xf if li “ ␣x,
and vi :“ xt if li “ x. Moreover, we add for each variable x P V the constraints Upxt, xf, tq and
Ipxt, xf, fq. Finally, add the constraint t ‰ f and Ipt, f, fq.
It is clear that if Φ has the satisfying assignment α: V Ñ t0, 1u then the following assignment
β satisﬁes all constraints in Ψ. Choose Sf Ĺ St arbitrarily. Then β maps t to St and f to Sf, it
maps xt P V to St if αpxq “ 1 and to Sf otherwise, it maps xf P V to Sf if αpxq “ 1 and to St
otherwise, and for every clause C “ tl1, l2, l3u of Φ it maps uC to St if αpl1q “ 1 or αpl2q “ 1, and
to Sf otherwise.
Conversely, suppose that β maps the variables of Ψ to the elements of Γ satisfying all constraints
of Ψ. Let B be the ﬁnite Boolean algebra that is generated by βpV q in Γ. Since βpfq Ĺ βptq, we
have that βptq is non-empty. Select an arbitrary atom a of B that is contained in βptq. Then we
set αpxq for x P V to 1 if a Ď βpxtq and to 0 otherwise. In this way all clauses tl1, l2, l3u of Φ are
satisﬁed. To see this, assume for simplicity of presentation that l1 “ ␣x is negative and l2 “ y and
l3 “ z are positive; the general case is analogous. Since we have the constraints Upxf, yt, uCq and
UpuC, zt, tq, and since a is an atom of B, one of βpxfq, βpytq, βpztq must contain a. If a is in βpytq
or βpztq then αpyq or αpzq is set to 1. If a is in βpxfq, then the clause Ipxt, xf, fq forces that a is
not in βpxtq, and hence αpxq is set to 0. Thus, α sets at least one of ␣x, y, z to 1, and the clause
C is satisﬁed.
Theorem 40. Let Γ be a set constraint language. Suppose that Γ contains all relations from EI,
and also contains a relation that is not from EI. Then there is a ﬁnite sublanguage Γ1 of Γ such
that CSPpΓ1q is NP-hard.
Proof. When R1, R2, . . . are the relations of Γ, let φ1, φ2, . . . be quantiﬁer-free ﬁrst-order formulas
that deﬁne RΓ
1 , RΓ
2 , . . . over S “ pPpNq; \, [, c, 0, 1q. Let RA
1 , RA
2 , . . . be the relations deﬁned by
φ1, φ2, . . . over A, and let ∆be the relational structure with domain A and exactly those relations.
By Proposition 36, ∆contains a relation that is not preserved by rei, and contains all relations that
are preserved by rei. Consider the set F of all polymorphisms of ∆.
The set F does not contain rei, since this would contradict by Theorem 31 the fact that ∆contains
a relation that is not preserved by rei. Since F is locally closed, it follows from Theorem 37 that
all operations f P F are generated by ˜e. But then the relation tpx, y, zq | x “ y ‰ z _ x ‰ y “ zu
is preserved by all operations in F, and hence pp deﬁnable in Γ by Theorem 29. This relation
has an NP-complete CSP [BK08]. Let ∆1 be the reduct of ∆that contains exactly the relations
19

that appear in those pp deﬁnitions. Clearly, there are ﬁnitely many such relations; we denote the
corresponding relation symbols by τ1 Ă τ. By Lemma 28, CSPp∆1q is NP-hard.
This establishes also the hardness of CSPpΓq: let Γ1 be the τ 1-reduct of Γ.
We claim that
CSPpΓ1q and CSPp∆1q are the same computational problem. We have to show that a conjunction
of atomic τ 1-formulas Φ is satisﬁable in Γ1 if and only if it is true in ∆1. Replacing each atomic
τ 1-formula in Φ by its quantiﬁer-free ﬁrst-order deﬁnition, this follows from Theorem 27.
8
Concluding Remarks
We have introduced the powerful set constraint language of EI set constraints, which in particular
contains all Horn-Horn set constraints and all previously studied tractable set constraint languages.
Constraint satisfaction problems over EI can be solved in polynomial – even quadratic – time. Our
tractability result is complemented by a complexity result which shows that tractability of EI set
constraints is best-possible within a large class of set constraint languages.
It is not hard to see from the properties we prove for EI set constraints that there is an algorithm
to test whether a given ﬁnite set constraint language (where relations in the language are given by
quantiﬁer-free formulas over the signature t\, [, c, 0, 1u) is contained in EI. This means that the
so-called meta-problem for EI set constraints can be decided eﬀectively.
We would also like to remark that one can analogously obtain tractability for the class of
constraints where the inner clauses of the positive outer literals are dual Horn (i.e., have at most
one negative literal).
