arXiv:1901.08329v2  [cs.NI]  12 Nov 2019
1
When Machine Learning Meets Big Data:
A Wireless Communication Perspective
Yuanwei Liu, Senior Member, IEEE, Suzhi Bi, Senior Member, IEEE, Zhiyuan Shi, Member, IEEE, and Lajos
Hanzo Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—We have witnessed an exponential growth in com-
mercial data services, which has lead to the ’big data era’.
Machine learning, as one of the most promising artiﬁcial intelli-
gence tools of analyzing the deluge of data, has been invoked
in many research areas both in academia and industry. The
aim of this article is twin-fold. Firstly, we brieﬂy review big
data analysis and machine learning, along with their potential
applications in next-generation wireless networks. The second
goal is to invoke big data analysis to predict the requirements of
mobile users and to exploit it for improving the performance of
“social network-aware wireless”. More particularly, a uniﬁed big
data aided machine learning framework is proposed, which con-
sists of feature extraction, data modeling and prediction/online
reﬁnement. The main beneﬁts of the proposed framework are
that by relying on big data which reﬂects both the spectral and
other challenging requirements of the users, we can reﬁne the
motivation, problem formulations and methodology of powerful
machine learning algorithms in the context of wireless networks.
In order to characterize the efﬁciency of the proposed framework,
a pair of intelligent practical applications are provided as
case studies: 1) To predict the positioning of drone-mounted
areal base stations (BSs) according to the speciﬁc tele-trafﬁc
requirements by gleaning valuable data from social networks.
2) To predict the content caching requirements of BSs according
to the users’ preferences by mining data from social networks.
Finally, open research opportunities are identiﬁed for motivating
future investigations.
Index Terms—Next-generation networks, big data, machine
learning, UAV movement and wireless caching placement.
I. INTRODUCTION
The family of next-generation techniques appearing on
the horizon aim for providing high-quality communication
services relying on a high throughput, massive connectivity
and low delay. For cellular systems, 1-10 Gbps downlink
transmission rate and less than 1 millisecond delay is expected.
Meanwhile, 5G standards also allow conventional high-speed
cellular communication to coexist to be with Machine-to-
Machine (M2M) and the Internet of Things (IoT) services with
an emphasize on large coverage, advanced dense connectivity
(associated with up to one million sensor connections within
a square kilometer area) [1]. For instance, IoT networks
conceived for industrial control and health monitoring generate
vast amounts of sensing data. In addition, the autonomous

S.
Bi
is
with
Shenzhen
University,
Shenzhen,
China,

connected vehicles of the near future will support millions of
high-velocity devices, which would signiﬁcantly increase the
data trafﬁc of the emerging next-generation (NG) network.
The term ’Artiﬁcial Intelligence’ (AI) was ﬁrst coined by
John McCarthy dating back to 1956 [2]. As a branch of
computer science, AI promises to enhance the intelligence
of computers by imitating the actions of human beings, i.e.,
understanding natural language, planning, perceiving sounds
and objects as well as in problem solving and learning,
as illustrated in Fig. 1. There are numerous techniques of
formulating AI solutions. The early seminal approaches tend
to explicitly program a decision system by leveraging domain-
speciﬁc knowledge, leading to the concept of expert systems.
Various carefully deﬁned rules have to be structured and
shaped for creating such domain-speciﬁc expert programs. In
contrast to the expert systems containing millions of lines of
codes along with decision trees and complex rules, machine
learning is of potentially lower complexity, hence it has made
tremendous progress over the last decades [3]. The stylized
relationship between machine learning and AI is illustrated in
Fig. 1. The core motivation behind machine learning is that of
allowing automonous learning/training based on its access to
huge amounts of data, rather than writing hard-coded routines
of speciﬁc instructions. The resultant algorithm then offers a
variety of intelligent actions, ranging from learning based on
past experience, reasoning for comprehending complex ideas
and generalizing to new situations.
In this light, a natural question arises: how can big data and
machine learning help to enhance the performance of future
5G and beyond wireless networks? At the time of writing it
is not so widely understood how to harness machine learning
techniques for solving the typical optimization problems in
wireless networks scenarios relying on big data analysis.
Contributing to the solution of this problem motivates us to
develop this treatise, where the big data resources are exploited
by analytical machine learning tools, in support of intelligent
applications in wireless networks. The main contributions of
this article can be summarized as follows. 1) The beneﬁcial
exploitation of big data resources in wireless networks are dis-
cussed; 2) Three classiﬁcation approaches suitable for machine
learning are proposed according to different criteria. Both
the pros and cons are discussed by considering compelling
application scenarios. 3) A uniﬁed framework of invoking
machine learning techniques in social network-aware wireless
is proposed and augmented by considering a pair of intelligent
application scenarios.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. In Section

2
Understanding 
Natural 
Languages
Problem 
Solving 
and 
Learning
Planning
Perceiving 
Sounds and 
Objects
Robotics
Rule-based 
Techniques, 
Expert 
Systems
Wireless
Artificial Intelligent
Tech
E
Sy
Machine 
Learning
Fig. 1.
Relationships between artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning.
In a rule-based system, the static knowledge is explicitly represented as a
set of rules that can be thought of as a collection of facts, constraints or
regulators. An expert system constitutes one of the classic examples of a
rule-based system that makes use of various domain-speciﬁc expert programs.
The implementation and integration of heuristic knowledge also provides a
basis for transparency and ﬂexibility. By contrast, machine learning, tends to
automatically learn computational models based on its access to huge amounts
of data without relying on hard-coded routines of speciﬁc instructions.
II, we introduce the forthcoming ‘big data era’, followed by
the classiﬁcation and the pros as well as cons of machine
learning in Section III. Then we propose a uniﬁed big data
aided machine learning framework in Section IV, followed
by discussing a pair of promising case studies in Section
V. Finally, our conclusions and future research scenarios are
discussed in Section VI.
II. BIG DATA IN WIRELESS NETWORKS
In this section, we will classify the family of existing data
sources into three broad categories, namely general wireless
data, social network-aware data (social data) and cloud data, as
illustrated in Fig. 2. The corresponding application scenarios
are discussed below.
A. Wireless Data
The big data generated by wireless users contains useful
information about their activity patterns versus time, fre-
quency and space. For instance, we can infer from the data
trafﬁc/demand variation over time, the interference power at
different frequencies, and the congestion level distribution at
different locations, etc. By exploiting these spectral patterns,
we can efﬁciently manage the wireless resources for improving
the system’s spectral efﬁciency and for enhancing the users’
service quality. As shown in Fig. 2, one of these intelligent
applications is load balancing relying on proactive wireless
resource allocation. In this context the operator can adjust the
transmit power, frequency or direction (e.g., through sectorized
antennas) of different base station transmitters relying on the
estimation of the mobile users’ distributions. Furthermore, the
operator can dispatch mobile base stations in advance when
anticipating a regional surge of data trafﬁc. Another important
application is constituted by wireless security surveillance.
Given the spectral activity patterns inferred we can detect
anomalies in the radio environment, such as the perspective
of rouge base stations, based on atypical measured real-time
spectrum usage. The key challenge of the above applications
is to derive such a “radio map” from the vast amount of noisy
wireless big data, so that we can accurately characterize the
spectral usage patterns in different dimensions and scales [4].
B. Social Data
The main cause of the soaring data volume in the Internet is
online social networks. The penetration of the mobile Internet
into our daily lives makes convenient multimedia communi-
cations ubiquitously accessible for everyone. The amount of
social data has reached to an astonishing magnitude and it is
set to maintain an increasing tendency in the next few years.
In 2017, on average over 500 million Tweeter messages per
day were generated, and more than 80% of them were initiated
from mobile terminals (data from online). Social network data
on one hand is featured by its strong ties to public events
in the physical world. For instance, an important football
match or political event may inspire heated online discussions
that may last for days; meanwhile, frequent sharing of high-
score online evaluations about a movie premiere or a newly
opened restaurant may attract a large number of customers
in the real world. On the other hand, mobile social network
data contains rich information about the contexts/preferences
of individuals or social groups. For instance, we can infer
from the tweets that a group of mobile users are at a famous
tourist site, but they are unhappy about the wireless services.
Accordingly, we can improve the typical tourist-experience
by temporarily allocating more bandwidth to the nearby base
stations. As a result, a social network-aware wireless concept
can be conceived. Here, the major technical difﬁculty is to
infer the true “meaning” of the users’ messages, based on
which appropriate actions can be taken. Given the vast amount
of social network data and the diverse nature of information
conveyed, e.g., text or multimedia, this may be achievable
through advanced machine learning.
C. Cloud Data
Another major cause of data tsunami in wireless network
is the transmission of multimedia contents stored in the
cloud servers. It is predicted that by 2019, over 80% of the
world’s Internet trafﬁc will be videos, such as Youtube short
clips, Netﬂix long clips, and Facebook live streaming (data
from online). Meanwhile, online audio streaming services
also contribute a large fraction of the remaining 20% data
trafﬁc. A unique feature of cloud-based big data is that
the users’ preferences concerning a certain content are often
similar and correlated. For instance, 3% of YouTube videos
accounts for over 90% of its total views (data from online).
In other words, most contents transferred over the Internet
are based on its popularity. We can therefore reduce the tele-
trafﬁc of the system by exploiting the users’ preference for
speciﬁc cloud contents. For instance, we can pre-cache the
most popular videos at the edge servers, so that no real-time
backhaul data downloading is needed for frequent requests.
Besides, by caching the video contents at multiple nearby

3
Wireless Data
Social Data
Proactive Resource 
Allocation
Wireless Security 
Surveillance
Network Planning
Broadband Access
Radio Spectrum Map
Massive Connectivity
M2M Communication
Social Media
Social Commerce
Mobile social 
network
Niche Market 
Advertisement
User Behavior 
Prediction
Context-aware 
Wireless Network
Social Context and 
Preference
Cloud Data
P2P Download
Streaming Media
Cloud File Storage
Wireless Caching
Content-oriented 
Handover
Content 
Recommendation
Content Preference 
Distribution
Cause
Derive
Apply to
Cause
Derive
Apply to
Cause
Derive
Apply to
Fig. 2. Wireless big data: its source, the information hidden in it and its applications.
base stations, we can form a virtual antenna array and support
seamless handovers for mobile terminals. Additionally, each
individual user’s preferences for speciﬁc multimedia contents,
if available, can be used for predicting the user’s future
demand, based on which the network operator can perform
pre-feeding or recommendation actions. Naturally, the main
technical challenge is to accurately predict the users’ prefer-
ence distribution. Another challenge is to correctly label the
tremendous amount of videos for future reference/searching.
In this case, using manual labeling is infeasible for high-
population networks, hence artiﬁcial intelligence techniques
are needed for designing content-oriented intelligent wireless
transmissions.
III. MACHINE LEARNING IN WIRELESS NETWORKS
In this section, we will detail how we classify the machine
learning techniques and how they can be applied to wireless
communications. Moreover, the pros and cons of each machine
learning family are discussed, as illustrated in Fig. 3.
A. Human Supervision Requirement
According to whether or not the algorithms require human
supervision, the machine learning models may fall into three
general categories [5, 6].
• Supervised Learning is considered to be a major branch
in machine learning, which has been extensively studied
and developed. Large quantities of human-labeled data
should always be readily available for learning a func-
tional mapping between the training samples observed
and the desired output. The advantage of supervised
learning is that both the convergence speed and the action
quality are high, although they typically require a large
amount of data to be labeled manually, which makes the
data processing more complex. Attractive scenarios for
applying supervised learning can be wireless resource
allocation, encoder and decoder design, where the ob-
jective function deﬁnition of the application is clear and
collecting sufﬁcient training data is relatively easy and
less costly.
• Unsupervised Learning relies on vast amounts of unla-
beled data for inferring the underlying information struc-
ture, without depending on external resources and human
supervision. The advantage of unsupervised learning is
that no prior knowledge is required. However, this comes
at the cost of potentially reducing its accuracy. Another
disadvantage of unsupervised learning is that the automat-
ically discovered data is not always representative of real
world conditions. Given the unique features mentioned
above, unsupervised learning is suitable for solving the
problems of user association, user grouping for hybrid
multiple access, attack detection for malicious users, etc.
• Reinforcement learning was initially designed to dis-
cover optimal action spaces through adaption and inter-
actions in uncertain time-varying environments, which
provides another way of learning from unlabeled data,
as long as either positive or negative feedback can be
gleaned during the process of learning by trial and
error. In contrast to supervised/unsupervised learning,
reinforcement learning does not require direct supervi-
sion. Moreover, the interactive learning paradigm has
the capability of learning to act, so as to adapt itself
for achieving an ever-improving performance. The dis-
advantage of reinforcement learning is however that it
relies on huge amounts of resources. Another drawback
is that the resultant high-performance solutions often lack
plausible physical interpretations. Nonetheless, successful
application scenarios for reinforcement learning have
been found in unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) communi-
cations, autonomous driving, mobile edge computing and
wireless caching placement, just to name a few.

4
Machine Learning
Supervised
Batch Processing
Model Based
Supervision?
Incremental?
Generalize?
Instance Based
Online
Reinforcement
Unsupervised
PROS
CONS
Algorithms
Applications
Task-specific,
Effective
Require large labelled 
training data
Linear regression, 
Random forest, Support 
vector machines
Wireless resource allocation, 
Encoder and decoder design
Utilise unlabelled data
Implicit,
Reduced accuracy
K-means, Principal 
component analysis, 
Latent variable models 
User association, Attack 
detection from malicious 
user, User grouping for 
NOMA
Interactive learning, No 
direct supervision 
Interpretability漓
Require substantial 
computing resources
Q-learning, SARSA, A3C, 
Deep Q network,  DDPG, 
PPO
UAV, Autonomous driving, 
MEC, Wireless caching
One-off training
Less representative of 
streaming data
Mini-Batch Gradient 
Descents
Wireless caching, Offloading
Continuous updating,
Memory-efficient
Vulnerable to noisy data
Stochastic Gradient 
Descent, Online convex 
optimization
Cognitive radio, UAV 
movement
Computational efficiency
Coarse function 
approximations
Neural network, 
Decision Tree, 
Probabilistic Graphical 
Models
Trajectory prediction for 
mobile users, Channel 
modeling for mmWave
Learning
stage is not required
Excessive memory
requirement
K-nearest neighbor 
algorithm
Power spectrum density 
estimation, User demand 
prediction
Fig. 3. Classiﬁcation of machine learning, the corresponding pros/cons and application scenarios. The above table aims to provide a systematic review of
the practical applications of modern machine learning methods in wireless communication. By categorising the various approaches into three principal groups
according to 1) how they require human supervision 2) are they able to perform incremental learning 3) how they generalise large scale training/testing
scenarios, we explicitly demonstrate the pros and cons of each scheme and highlight the most appropriate applications.
B. Learning Capability
Based on their learning capability, we can classify the family
of machine learning models into two subsets [7].
• Batch learning based algorithms typically train a model
after a sufﬁciently high amount of training data has
been collected prior to the learning task. This ofﬂine
learning manner has the advantage of allowing for more
involved machine learning based on all the available data,
where the model tends to be updated infrequently in
general. The main advantage of batch learning is that the
convergence speed is high. However, batch learning may
not be suitable for real-time learning of rapidly ﬂuctuating
processes subject to stringent delay requirements. As a
result, beneﬁcial application scenarios can be wireless
caching or wireless ofﬂoading.
• Online learning
enables a model to learn from a
stream of data instances arriving sequentially, which is
achieved by continuously changing and adapting its struc-
ture and parameters. The ‘on-the-ﬂy’ learning scheme
holds the promise of being both memory efﬁcient and
highly scalable in solving large-scale learning problems.
A particularly remarkable advantage of online learning
is that it is eminently suitable for real-time processing.
Nevertheless, its convergence speed typically requires
slow. Therefore, online learning can be used for cognitive
radio networks or UAV movement scheduling.
C. Generalization Requirement
On the basis of how the methods generalize their ﬁndings
from the training data to hitherto unseen examples, the ma-
chine learning models can be split into two parts [8].
• Instance-based learning algorithms [9] tend to use the
whole set of instances found in the training data stream
for constructing inference structures and for predicting
unseen instances. Although they are quite capable of
competent generalization, this is achieved at the cost of
extended search time and high memory requirements.
An especially remarkable advantage of instance-based
learning is that it does not require any prior-model as-
sumptions. Therefore, instance-based learning is suitable
for complex wireless scenarios, such as power spectrum
density estimation or user demand prediction. However,
large data sets are required for high-quality instance-
based learning.
• Model-based learning aims for ﬁnding the optimal
parameters of the algorithms designed [10], so as to
optimize the objective function and to maximize the
generalization capability in the face of hitherto unseen
testing data. Such models usually suffer from limited ac-
curacy, but offer higher computational efﬁciency. Hence
the key advantage of model-based learning is that its
implementation cost is low. Given these attributes, model-
based learning can be readily used for the movement tra-
jectory prediction of mobile users, for channel modeling
estimation in millimeter wave communications, etc.
IV. A UNIFIED BIG DATA AIDED AI FRAMEWORK
In this section, we propose the new uniﬁed machine learning
framework in Fig. 4. According to social data, cloud data or
wireless data, we aim for invoking advanced machine learning
approaches for analysing the data for extracting useful infor-
mation. More particularly, the proposed framework includes

5
three stages, as illustrated in Fig. 4, which are detailed in the
following.
1) Feature Extraction: during this stage, we aim for
extracting feature from the data sets, which contain the geo-
location tags of mobile users. Possible data sets can be
social, wireless data or cloud data, as illustrated in Fig. 2.
Let us consider social data as an example, including social
media, social commerce or mobile social networks. We can
derive social context and user preferences with the aid of
social data by invoking natural language processing or other
techniques. The detailed procedure includes a pair of steps.
The ﬁrst step is syntax processing: the input is the tremendous
amount of social data, which is subjected to natural language
processing techniques, such as language identiﬁcation, tok-
enization, lemmatization, stemming, etc. The output should
be some useful geo-and-time-tagged key words according to
the speciﬁc application, say crime prevention. The second step
is semantic analysis: The input for this step is constituted by
the key words subtracted during the last stage, with the aid of
applying sophisticated techniques, such as lexical semantics,
clustering content, sentiment analysis, and summarization. The
outputs are expected to be context-aware user preferences. A
suitable example is to apply the Twitter data to predict the
hot topics of high popularity for content caching in wireless
networks.
2) Data Modelling: the feature extraction stage mentioned
before can be regarded as the pre-data processing. This data
modelling stage constitutes the core process of establishing
a machine learning model. More particularly, the feature we
have extracted from the last stage such as the user mobility
and content popularity of users represent the data set we seek
for modelling the problem. Usually, we ﬁrst formulate an ob-
jective function (e.g., maximizing the QoE, reducing delay or
improving energy efﬁciency) for enhancing the performance of
wireless networks considered. Then we invoke the modelling
strategies listed in the data modelling stage of Fig. 4 for
mathematically representing the formulated problems.
3) Prediction/Online Reﬁnement: After establishing the
machine learning model, we proceed either to the prediction or
to the online reﬁnement stage. For the prediction, this implies
that the model established can only be used for predicting
the user behavior/network performance without updating the
model invoked. Regarding the online reﬁnement, this means
that the model established can be reﬁned based on changes
in the real-time data input. The intuitive difference between
prediction and online reﬁnement is that the system provides
a ﬂexible mechanism for inference testing either relying on
an off-line model or on a periodically reﬁned model. The
selection of these two variants ultimately depends on the
particular context of a speciﬁc application. For the use case
when the data distribution does not show large variations
over the pertinent time scales, prediction relying on an off-
line trained model is always the best choice for ease of
computation. On the other hand, online reﬁnement has to be
the undertaken for improving local errors, when the data are
intrinsically time-varying. However, the latter is computation-
ally more demanding. Note that a remarkable advantage of
this framework is that the machine learning model depends
not only on the historical data, but also on real-time data.
For example, we could periodically use the past two weeks
of data to predict the next day’s trends. By exploiting these
time sequence characteristics, the prediction capability of this
model becomes quite accurate and timely. The techniques
listed in the prediction/online reﬁnement stage of Fig. 4 can
all be beneﬁcially applied.
V. CASE STUDY: SOCIAL NETWORK-AWARE WIRELESS
Having introduced the three key stages of the proposed
framework, the next important step is to identify suitable
application scenarios. In this section, we will consider a pair
of intelligent applications for demonstrating how to apply
our big data aided machine learning framework for fostering
intelligent wireless networks. In both case studies, we exploit
the position information collected by using Twitter’s API
to infer the periodic behaviors of users in social networks.
Efﬁcient algorithms based on neural networks are proposed
for predicting the user’s mobility or content popularity, which
belongs to the feature extraction stage. Then reinforcement
learning is invoked for solving the problems formulated in the
data modeling stage, either for cooperative caching or UAV
deployment, for example.
A. Dynamic UAV Deployment and Movement Design
Thanks to the rapid capability-upgrade of drones, base
stations (BSs) on-the-ﬂy have emerged as an efﬁcient solution
for improving the radio coverage conditions in the face of
rapidly ﬂuctuating trafﬁc demands by appropriately adjusting
the drone positions. Given the availability of drone-mounted
BSs, how to position them for satisfying the dynamically
evolving data requests and hence maximizing the beneﬁts to
operators becomes one of the most challenging and critical
problems. In such a scenario, the strategy to deploy the drone-
mounted BSs can be categorized into the following two types:
a) Pre-deploy UAVs before the requests come. Based on the
proposed framework, the historical social data can be exploited
for predicting the forthcoming data requests in a certain area.
If the outputs of data mining indicate that data requests may
be expected to exceed the capability of ﬁxed BSs covering
that area, drone-mounted BSs can be deployed to that area
in advance. The beneﬁt of this strategy is to provide im-
proved user experience by enhancing the network’s capability
before congestions happen. b) Move UAVs based on real-
time requests. Naturally, historical social data cannot exactly
predict the user requests since they ﬂuctuate dynamically.
Therefore, a real-time UAV-action is desired for improving
the network’s capability to improve user experience. The real-
time social data related to the area of interest, such as tweets
complaining about poor network quality, can be further ana-
lyzed and more drone-mounted BSs can be dispatched to the
hot-spot area. More particularly, by analyzing the complaining
tweets, we ﬁrst decide the satisfaction level of users about the
current transmit rate based on the quality-of-service (QoE)
model, which identiﬁes the potential tele-trafﬁc congestion
events. Finally, the required number of UAVs, as well as the
movement of UAVs, can be decided for maximizing the sum

6
Data 
Modelling
Wireless 
Caching 
Placement
Drone-
Mounted BSs 
Deployments
Adaptive 
NOMA 
Social media 
data
Feature 
Extraction
Prediction/On
line 
Refinement
Live 
streaming 
data
Features
Periodically 
update
Predicted 
behaviors
Raw 
input
Raw Data Sets
Proposed Unified Machine Learning Framework
Applications
• Language identification
• Tokenization
• Lemmatization 
• Stemming
• Lexical semantics
• Clustering content 
• Sentiment analysis
• Summarization
• Advanced Recurrent 
Neural Networks
• Attention mechanisms
• Memory Networks
• Neural Turing 
Machines
• Markov and hidden 
Markov models
• Online convex 
optimization
• Incremental stochastic 
gradient descent
• Progressive learning 
• Adaptive online 
updating  methods
Fig. 4. A Uniﬁed Big Data Aided Machine Learning Framework.
mean of score (MOS) of users by adopting machine learning
approaches.
In this case study, multiple UAVs are used as ﬂying BSs
for serving ground users by considering both of the aforemen-
tioned two types of UAV deployments. Each UAV is capable of
roaming in a free 3D space. The ground users are supposed to
move ﬂexibly. Therefore, UAVs can ﬂy dynamically according
to the real-time position information of users. Fig. 5 (a) illus-
trates the four steps of UAV deployment and movement design
relying on the proposed framework. Step I can be regarded as
the feature extraction stage. Here the movement of users is
the key feature we would like to extract. Regarding the data
modelling stage, multi-agent Q-learning is the core algorithm
invoked at this stage, which is employed both in Step II and
Step IV for designing the speciﬁc deployment and movement
of UAVs. Fig. 5 (b) illustrates how a UAV moves from an
initial position to its ﬁnal destination with the aid of applying
reinforcement learning for formulating its trajectory. In our
scenarios, multiple UAVs move simultaneously according to
the prediction of the movement of ground users, which can
be regarded as the prediction stage. By doing so, the pre-
deployment of UAVs can be achieved for enhancing the energy
efﬁciency of networks.
Fig. 6 characterizes the comparison of the throughput be-
tween the moving-UAV solution (both pre-deployed and real-
time movement solution) and static-UAV solution. It can be
observed that the instantaneous transmit rate decreases, as
time elapses. This is because the users are roaming during
each time slot, and when the density of users is reduced, the
instantaneous sum of the transmit rate is affected. It can also
be observed that re-deploying UAVs based on the movement
of users is an efﬁcient method of mitigating the downward
trend compared to the static scenario.
B. Wireless Caching Placement and Resource Allocation
Due to the rapid development of mass-storage techniques,
storage becomes an increasingly low cost resource, whilst the
opposite trend prevails for spectral resources. The caching
process is constituted by two parts: caching placement and
cached content delivery. In contrast to most of the existing
research contributions, which have assumed that the caching
placement process follows a speciﬁed distribution, in this case
study, the content caching at each BS is dynamically varied
according to the requirements of users. More particularly, with
the aid of social data within a given area and the corre-
sponding location information of BSs, the caching placement
can be beneﬁcially improved. The main objective of caching
placement is typically to identify the most popular K ﬁles
to be stored in the BS during a particular period in order to
reduce the potential latency to download these ﬁles by the
users. To efﬁciently allocate wireless contents, such as video
clips to base stations, some prior information is required, on
user mobility and content popularity. However, the compli-
cated relationships between historical information and future
information make conventional approaches less applicable.
AI algorithms are capable of predicting the demands of the
networks in the near future, which helps us to efﬁciently cache
most popular contents when the communication resources
(e.g., bandwidth, storage capacity and computing speed, etc)
are ﬁnite. Considering some of the recent vile terrorist attacks
as an example, typically there are immediate reactions in social
media, such as Facebook and Twitter. In the ensuing period
the discussions, related posts and messages on the social
data will increase. By invoking natural language processing
to analyse the posts, the key words can be extracted. Then
the key words may be classiﬁed or mapped to different hot
topics. The different hot topics here decide what contents
should be cached in particular base stations. Based on the time-
geo-tagged hot topics, machine learning may be invoked for
training this learning model. The ﬁnal goal is that according
to the historical key words in a certain past period of say 24
hours, the content to be cached in the next period of 2 hours
for example can be dynamically decided.
Fig. 7 (a) illustrates the detailed procedure of wireless
caching. More particularly, we can still map the wireless
caching placement to our proposed framework. In the fea-
ture extraction stage, both the mobility of the users and
the content popularity have to be predicted for supporting

7
Step I: Data collection of 
ground users
Step II: Initial deployment 
of UAVs
Obtain geographical 
information of ground users 
from online social networks
Step III: Movement 
prediction of users
Obtain three-dimensional 
position of UAVs at initial 
time slot
Predict the coordinate of 
ground users at each time 
slot
Step IV: Joint path design and 
power control of UAVs
Obtain QoS-oriented power 
control and path design scheme 
to maximize  sum transmit rate  
Twitter API
Multi-agent Q-learning 
algorithm
ESN algorithm
Multi-agent Q-learning 
algorithm
(a) Procedure for UAV deployment and movement
398
279
400
281
Altitude (m)
278
402
Y-coordinate (m)
X-coordinate (m)
404
280.5
277
276
280
trajectory form Q-learning
Initial point
Final point
t=81s
t=20s  t=100s
t=40s
t=15s
t=4s
t=50s
(b) Trajectory for UAV deployment and movement
Fig. 5. Case study of deployment and movement Design for multiple-UAV networks: [14].
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Times (s)
3.4
3.6
3.8
4
4.2
4.4
4.6
Throughput (bits/s/Hz)
Real-time moving solution
Pre-deploying solution
Static-UAV solution
Fig. 6. Comparison of throughput between moving-UAV solution and static-
UAV solution.
proactive content placement. During the data modelling stage,
neutral networks and reinforcement learning may be invoked
for mathematically modelling the mobility/content popularity
and for cooperative caching placement, respectively. During
the prediction stage, the output of neural networks [13] can
be used for predicting the cooperative caching allocation.
Fig. 7 (b) shows total mean opinion score (MOS) of the
users in the network versus time for different algorithms.
In the initial time period, the optimal contents are placed
according to the users’ positions. Then, since we consider a
user movement scenario, the positions of users change with the
time period. Therefore, the content placement is not optimal.
Hence the total MOS of users decreases. We can observe
that the Q-learning algorithm, which is a close relative of
the reinforcement learning algorithm, is capable of achieving
a near-optimal performance, whilst outperforming global K-
means (GKM) based caching.
VI. FUTURE CHALLENGES AND CONCLUDING REMARKS
In this article, the design challenges of invoking machine
learning techniques for enhancing wireless networks with
the aid of big data solutions have been investigated. The
key features of big data have been identiﬁed ﬁrst, which
spawn new research opportunities for wireless networks. Then
the classiﬁcation of machine learning techniques and their
corresponding application scenarios in wireless networks were
discussed. Furthermore, a uniﬁed big data aided machine
learning framework has been proposed. This is followed by
introducing a pair of case studies in wireless networks, namely
UAV deployment/trajectory design and wireless caching place-
ment. Yet numerous open research opportunities have to be
pursued in the context of machine learning aided wireless
communications, which are highlighted as follows:
• Adaptive Non-Orthogonal Massive Multiple Access:
Non-orthogonal multiple access (NOMA) constitutes a
multi-faceted technique of enhancing wireless networks.
Note that each form has its own advantages and disadvan-
tages. Therefore, different NOMA techniques are suitable
for different scenarios, as illustrated in Table 9 of [15].
Motivated by this, a software-deﬁned NOMA architec-
ture is proposed for supporting diverse user scenarios.
However, the tele-trafﬁc demands can vary seasonally or
due to the public events. Therefore, machine learning
can be invoked to predict the data trafﬁc. The MA
settings can be categorized into two types, pre-settings
and real-time settings. Batch learning can be used for pre-
settings. While the real-time settings are typically based
on the users’ feedback on social media for example to
dynamically change the MA settings on demand, which
may invoke online learning, as mentioned in Section III.
• Autonomous Driving in V2X networks: Autonomous
driving has the potential to beneﬁt society in numerous
ways, such as reducing trafﬁc congestion and mitigat-
ing the environmental footprint of modern day trafﬁc.
The combination of autonomous driving and vehicle-to-
everything (V2I) communications enable automated ve-
hicles to receive up-to-date information about the neigh-
bouring vehicles’ dynamics and other trafﬁc information,
thereby enhancing both safety and trafﬁc efﬁciency. The
deep reinforcement learning models mentioned in Section
III that are trained by interacting with the environment,
may be utilized for optimizing the behaviours of vehicles
by exploring the environment in an iterative manner

8
Deep neural network
Time series forcasting
Problems
Data modelling
Prediction
Caching resource allocation
Big data based
feature extraction
Machine learning based
cooperative caching
Content placement
Reinforcement learning
Mobility prediction
Popularity prediction
Predicted 
results
Predicted 
results
Social data
Cloud data
Wireless data
(a) Flowchart for Wireless Caching
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Time Period
510
520
530
540
550
560
570
Total MOS
User=100,Optimal Caching
User=100,Qlearning based Caching
User=100,GKM based caching
User=100,Caching without mobility
User=50,Optimal Caching
User=50,Qlearning based Caching
User=50,GKM based caching
User=50,Caching without mobility
User=100
User=50
(b) Simulation Results for Wireless Caching.
Fig. 7. Case study of content placement in wireless cooperative caching [12].
and learn from mistakes. With the aid of cloud data or
wireless data, the requirements of V2I networks can be
updated in real-time. In this case, the autonomous vehicle
becomes capable of safely reaching its destination while
avoiding trafﬁc jams with the aid of up-to-date trafﬁc
information.
• Intelligent Computation Ofﬂoading: Mobile-edge com-
puting (MEC) is a promising technique of meeting the
ever-increasing computational demands of mobile appli-
cations by providing computing capabilities at the edge of
wireless networks, while migrating the computationally-
intensive tasks to the MEC server. The core concept of
MEC is to provide abundant computing capabilities at
the edges of networks to mitigate both the backhaul and
fronthaul load and to reduce the energy consumption of
mobile users. Task ofﬂoading decisions and computa-
tional resource allocation constitute a pair of challenges
in MEC. Obtaining an optimal ofﬂoading policy in such
a dynamic MEC system in real time is challenging.
Machine learning is capable of intelligent inferences from
historic information. By using the proposed framework, a
real-time dynamic MEC system operating with the aid of
social data can be designed by utilizing machine learn-
ing algorithms to attain signiﬁcant performance versus
complexity beneﬁts.
