Discourse-level Relation Extraction via Graph Pooling
I-Hung Hsu 1, Xiao Guo 2, Premkumar Natarajan 1, Nanyun Peng 1, 3
1 Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California
2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University
3 Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles

Abstract
The ability to capture complex linguistic structures and long-
term dependencies among words in the passage is essential
for discourse-level relation extraction (DRE) tasks. Graph
neural networks (GNNs), one of the methods to encode de-
pendency graphs, have been shown effective in prior works
for DRE. However, relatively little attention has been paid
to receptive ﬁelds of GNNs, which can be crucial for cases
with extremely long text that requires discourse understand-
ing. In this work, we leverage the idea of graph pooling and
propose to use pooling-unpooling framework on DRE tasks.
The pooling branch reduces the graph size and enables the
GNNs to obtain larger receptive ﬁelds within fewer layers;
the unpooling branch restores the pooled graph to its original
resolution so that representations for entity mention can be
extracted. We propose Clause Matching (CM), a novel lin-
guistically inspired graph pooling method for NLP tasks. Ex-
periments on two DRE datasets demonstrate that our models
signiﬁcantly improve over baselines when modeling long-term
dependencies is required, which shows the effectiveness of the
pooling-unpooling framework and our CM pooling method.
1
Introduction
Relation extraction, the task to extract the relation between
entities in the text, is an important step for automatic knowl-
edge base construction (Al-Zaidy and Giles 2017; Dong et al.
2014). While earlier works in relation extraction focus on
relations within a single sentence (Xu et al. 2015; Miwa and
Bansal 2016), recent works place more emphasis on identi-
fying the relations that appear at discourse level (Jia, Wong,
and Poon 2019; Xu, Chen, and Zhao 2021), which is more
practical yet challenging to models. Most notably, models
need to consider larger amount of information and capture
the long-term dependencies between words to catch relations
between entities spanning several sentences. For example, in
Fig. 1, the relation between Cystitis and Adrimycin can only
be understood by considering the whole paragraph.
To capture such long-term dependencies, previous works
incorporate dependency trees to capture syntactic clues in a
non-local manner (Zhang, Qi, and Manning 2018; Peng et al.
2017), which help the model to effectively explore a broader
context with structure. Graph neural networks (GNNs) have
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Early adjuvant adriamycin in superficial bladder carcinoma . A
multicenter study was performed in 110 patients with superficial
transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder . Adriamycin ( 50 mg / 50 ml )
was administered intravesically within 24 h after transurethral resection
of TA - T1 ( O - A ) bladder tumors . Instillation was repeated twice
duringthefirst week ,then weekly duringthefirst monthand afterwards
monthlyfor1year.Thetolerancewasevaluatedinthese110patients,and
29 patients presented with local side - effects . In 24 of these patients
chemicalcystitiswassevereenoughforthemtodropoutofthestudy…….
Adria
mycin
Bladder
Carcinoma
Cystitis
1:CID:2
None
Figure 1: An example of DRE from the CDR dataset. The
oval represents chemical Adriamycin, and rectangles repre-
sent two diseases: Bladder Carcinoma and Cystitis. Reading
the whole passage over six sentences is essential to the un-
derstanding the relation between Adriamycin and Cystitis.
been widely applied in this case (Peng et al. 2017; Song et al.
2018; Sahu et al. 2019). However, the receptive ﬁelds (Luo
et al. 2016) of GNNs, which measure the information range
that a node in a graph can access, are less discussed. In theory,
it is essential for GNNs to obtain a larger receptive ﬁeld for
learning representations to better capture extremely long-
term dependencies. It is non-trivial for prior methods (Peng
et al. 2017; Song et al. 2018; Sahu et al. 2019) to achieve this
requirement and usually requires additional efforts, such as
properly stacking a deep network and without being potential
saturation like oversmoothing (Li, Han, and Wu 2018).
To alleviate this effort and facilitate the representation
learning for entity mentions in discourse-level relation extrac-
tion (DRE) tasks, in this work, we leverage the idea of graph
pooling and propose to use a pooling-unpooling framework
(as depicted in Figure 2). In the pooling branch, we use graph
pooling to convert the input graph to a series of more com-
pact hypergraphs by merging structurally similar or related
nodes. The node representation learning on the hypergraph
thus aggregates a larger neighborhood of features compared
to the learning on the original graph, increasing the size of the
receptive ﬁeld for each node. Then, we use unpooling layers
to restore the global information in hypergraphs back to the
original graph so that embeddings for each entity mention
can be extracted. With such a pooling-unpooling mechanism,
each graph node can obtain richer features.
arXiv:2101.00124v3  [cs.CL]  13 Nov 2021

GNN block
Unpooling layer
Phenobarbital   should   be   added   to   the   list   of   anticonvulsant   drugs    that 
nsubj:pass
𝐻1
𝑖𝑛= 𝑀0,1 𝐻0
𝑜𝑢𝑡
Input
GNN block
Unpooling layer
GNN block
Pooling layer
(𝑯𝟎
𝒐𝒖𝒕, 𝑮𝟎)
(𝑯𝟏
𝒊𝒏, 𝑮𝟏)
(𝑈1
𝑜𝑢𝑡, 𝐺1)
(𝑈0
𝑖𝑛, 𝐺0)
𝐻2
𝑜𝑢𝑡= fGNN (𝐻2
𝑖𝑛)
+
+
𝑈0
𝑖𝑛= 𝑀0,1
𝑇𝑈1
𝑜𝑢𝑡
𝑈0
𝑜𝑢𝑡= fGNN (𝑈𝑜𝑖𝑛)+ 𝐻0
𝑜𝑢𝑡
(𝐻0
𝑜𝑢𝑡, 𝐺0)
(𝐻1
𝑜𝑢𝑡, 𝐺1)
(𝐻2
𝑜𝑢𝑡, 𝐺2)
(𝑈1
𝑜𝑢𝑡, 𝐺1)
(𝑈0
𝑜𝑢𝑡, 𝐺0)
GNN block
GNN block
Pooling layer
aux
obl
nmod
coreference
coreference
Word Representation
Pooling-Unpooling
Mention Representation
(Hybrid Matching / Clause Matching)
Figure 2: Our proposed pooling-unpooling framework: Input words are ﬁrst encoded into vectors and then fed into pooling-
unpooling layers to learn the structural dependencies within the input tokens. GNN block can be any model that can encode
graphs and update node embeddings. Pooling layers merges nodes in the original graph into supernodes, forming smaller
size hypergraphs. Unpooling layers map the information from the coarser graph back to ﬁner-grained graph. In the ﬁgure, Gi
represents hypergraphs at the i-th level. Hin
i
and U in
i
denote the converted embeddings after the pooling and unpooling layers in
i-th hypergraph. Both of them can be calculated using the matching matrix Ml,l+1. We use Hout
i
and U out
i
to denote the reﬁned
representations after GNN blocks.
We use graph convolutional network (GCN) (Kipf and
Welling 2017), one of the most commonly used GNNs, to
instantiate our proposed pooling-unpooling framework. Ad-
ditionally, we explore two graph pooling strategies – Hybrid
Matching and Clause Matching to justify our method’s gen-
eralizability. Hybrid Matching (HM) (Liang, Gurukar, and
Parthasarathy 2021) merges nodes based on the structural sim-
ilarity and has got success in learning large-scale graph. How-
ever, HM ignores the edge type information when merges
nodes, which could be helpful to group nodes in DRE tasks.
For example, nodes linked with “nmod” dependency edge
can often be merged when considering its linguistic meaning
in text1. Thus, we propose Clause Matching (CM) to lever-
age the information regarding dependent arcs’ type to merge
nodes. Comparing to HM, which is a general graph pooling
algorithm that merges nodes by considering the overall graph
structure, CM is designed from the linguistic perspective
and speciﬁcally focuses on the dependent relations between
nodes. Despite differences, our proposed method with either
pooling method achieves improvements over baseline on two
DRE datasets – CDR (Li et al. 2016) and cross-sentence n-
ary (Peng et al. 2017). We further carry out a comprehensive
analysis to understand the proposed framework to verify the
pooling-unpooling framework’s effectiveness to handle cases
that requiring extreme long-term dependencies.
1“nmod” represents it is a nominal dependents of another noun
2
Method
In this section, we introduce our proposed pooling-unpooling
framework for DRE, which is illustrated in Figure 2. The
input to the system is a document graph that contains nodes
as tokens and edges as the tokens’ various dependencies
(Sec. 2.1). The node embeddings before pooling-unpooling
layers are word representations, which can be either static
word representations like GloVe or contextualized embedding
like BERT (Devlin et al. 2019). The node representations are
then fed into our pooling-unpooling framework, which con-
sists of a series of GNN blocks, pooling layers, and unpooling
layers. The framework updates node representations so that
they can better capture long-term dependencies. Speciﬁcally,
the pooling layer deterministically converts a graph into a
more compact hypergraph using matching matrices gener-
ated by graph pooling methods (Sec. 2.2). The unpooling
layer performs a reverse operation to the pooling layer, restor-
ing ﬁner-grain graphs from the hypergraphs to the original
graph (Sec. 2.3). Between each pooling and unpooling layers,
GNN blocks are employed to update node embeddings so
that the information within nodes can be exchanged. After
our pooling-unpooling layers, we can then extract the entity
mention representations and perform DRE tasks (Sec. 2.4).
2.1
Input Graph
We adapt document graph (Quirk and Poon 2017) to repre-
sent intra- and inter-sentential dependencies in texts to help

SEM
Disease-A
Syndrome-B
Drug-C
causes
treats
and
Syndrome-B
𝑛!
𝑛"
𝑛#
𝑛$
𝑛%
Syndrome-D
𝑛&
𝟏
𝟑× 𝟑
𝟏
𝟐× 𝟐
𝟏
𝟑× 𝟐
𝟏
𝟑× 𝟐
NHEM
causes
treats
Drug-C
Syndrome-B
Syndrome-D
and
Disease-A
Drug-C
causes
treats
Syndrome-B
and
Syndrome-B
𝑛'
𝑛(
𝑛!
𝑛"
𝑛#
𝑛$
𝑛%
Syndrome-D
𝑛&
𝑚'
Syndrome-B
Disease-A
𝑚'
𝑚!
𝑚(
𝟏
𝟏× 𝟑
Figure 3: The illustration of Hybrid Matching (HM) for the
example, “Disease-A causes Syndrome-B. Drug-C treats
Syndrome-B and Syndrome-D” with target entities “Disease-
A”, “Drug-C” and “Syndrome-D”. After performing HM,
the distances from “Drug-C” to “Disease-A”, and from
“Drug-C” to “Syndrome-D” decrease by 1.
models effectively explore a broader context of structure.
Document graph consists of nodes representing words and
edges representing various dependencies among words. Typ-
ically, two words can be linked if they (1) are adjacent, (2)
have dependency arcs, or (3) share discourse relations, such
as coreference or being roots of sequential sentences. We
use document graphs to represent input texts and apply our
model to them for leveraging syntactic and discourse clues.
2.2
Graph Pooling
Given the input graph G, our next step is to use graph pooling
to iteratively coarsens G into a smaller but structurally similar
graph G′. Graph pooling methods use various methods to dis-
cover nodes that can be grouped (Ying et al. 2018; Lee, Lee,
and Kang 2019), and then, nodes that are matched together
will be merged into a supernode. In this paper, we explore
two different graph pooling methods – Hybrid Matching and
our proposed Clause Matching.
Hybrid Matching.
Hybrid Matching (HM), proposed by
Liang, Gurukar, and Parthasarathy (2021), has been shown
effective for encoding large-scale graphs. It performs node
matching based on the connectivity between nodes and
consists of two steps: (1) structural equivalence matching
(SEM), and (2) normalized heavy edge matching (NHEM).
SEM merges two nodes that share the exact same neigh-
bor. In the Figure 3 example, the node n0 and the n2 are
considered as structural equivalence, since they share the
exact same neighbor, the node n1.
On the other hand, NHEM uses the graph’s adjacency ma-
trix A to perform node matching. Each node will be matched
with its neighbor that has the largest normalized edge weight,
under the constraint that supernodes cannot be merged again.
Normalized edge weight, N(u, v), for the edge between the
node u and the node v is:
N(u, v) =
Auv
p
D(u) × D(v)
,
(1)
where D(u) is the degree of the node u. The adjacency ma-
trix A of the original input document graph (i.e, A0) has cell
value A0
uv being either 1 or 0, indicating if a connection from
node u to v exists or not in the document graph. For the ad-
jacency matrix for pooled graphs, it can be calculated using
Equation 3, which will be discussed in the later paragraph.
When performing NHEM, we visit nodes by ascending order
according to the nodes’ degree following Liang, Gurukar, and
Parthasarathy (2021). We explain the process using the exam-
ple in Figure 3. After computing the normalized edge weight,
we ﬁrst visit the node n3 (degree equals 1), and merge it with
its only neighbor n4, forming the supernode m1. Then, we
visit the node n6 and merge it with n7, which has the largest
normalized edge weight with n6. Since supernodes cannot
be merged again, n1 and n5 remain. In the Figure 3 example,
after executing HM, we can observe that the distance between
targeted entities decreases.
Clause Matching.
The edge attribute could be important
to match nodes in the document graph. For example, “a red
apple” can be split into three nodes in the document graph,
although they are essentially one noun phrase. The depen-
dency tree shows that “a” is the determiner (det) of “apple”,
and “red” is an adjectival modiﬁer (amod) of “apple”. Such
edge information could be useful in the pooling operation,
but has been ignored by many graph pooling method like
HM. Inspired by this observation, we propose to merge to-
kens considering the dependency arcs’ type and introduce
Clause Matching (CM).
Speciﬁcally, we reference the Universal Dependencies
project (Nivre et al. 2020), which provide detailed deﬁnitions
of each dependency relation, to design the CM algorithm by
applying our domain knowledge. We ﬁrst classify all depen-
dency relations into two categories – core arguments and
others. Core arguments link predicates with their core depen-
dents, as a clause should at least consist of a predicate with
its core dependents. CM will merge tokens that are connected
by dependency relations in the others categories, e.g., “det”
and “amod” are not core arguments but others.. In the exam-
ple “a red apple”, by merging the two edges, “a red apple”
becomes one node that represents the noun phrase. Since we
do not merge nodes linked with core arguments, the basis of
a clause will be retained. As a result, CM simpliﬁes the graph
Algorithm 1: Clause Matching
Require: G = (V, E), E ⊆{e = (vi, vj)|(vi, vj) ∈V 2}.
Require: Edge type function fT : fT (e)= the edge type of e.
Require: Mergeable edge type set T.
1: Sort V by the number of neighbors in ascending order.
2: C = ∅# The set collects nodes that have merged others.
3: for vi ∈V do
4:
if vi /∈C then
5:
for vj ∈{vj|vj ∈V ; (vj, vi) ∈E} do
6:
if fT (e = (vj, vi)) ∈T then
7:
V = V \ {vi} # Merge vi to vj
8:
for vk ∈{vk|vk ∈V ; (vk, vi) ∈E} do
9:
# Move edges in vi to vj
10:
E = E \ {(vk, vi)}
11:
E = E ∪{(vk, vj)}
12:
C = C ∪{vj}
13:
break
14: return Pooled graph G = (V, E)

A
study
𝑛!
𝑛"
was
𝑛#
performed
𝑛$
in
𝑛%
patients
𝑛&
with
𝑛'
bladder
𝑛(
carcinoma
𝑛)
det
nsub: pass
aux: pass
case
obl
nmod
case
compound
CM
A
study
𝑚!
was
performed
𝑚"
in
patients
𝑚#
with bladder carcinoma
𝑚$
nsub: pass
obl
nmod
ADJ: NEXT
Figure 4: The visualization of Clause Matching (CM), given
the input “A study was performed in patients with bladder
carcinoma”. “ADJ:NEXT” indicates the adjacency edges in
the document graph. After executing CM once, the graph
size reduces largely yet still maintain the core structure of
the original sentence.
while maintaining the core components of a clause.
The details of CM are presented in Algorithm 1 2. CM
share similarities with HM in two points: (1) we visit nodes
by ascending order according to the node degree (line 1); (2)
supernodes cannot be merged again in each round of CM
(line 4). Being different from HM, we decide whether the
visited node can be merged with its dependent head based on
the edge type (line 6-7) 3.
We illustrate CM with an example in Figure 4. In Figure 4,
we will visit nodes n0, n2, n4, ..., n5 in order, based on
their node degree. When visiting n0, CM matches n0 with
its dependent head n1 because the dependent arc between
them belongs to the others types. Similarly, n2 is merged
with n3 and n4 is matched with n5, forming m1 and m2,
respectively. However, m2 cannot be further combined with
m1 because m2 is already a supernode in the current round
of CM. Moreover, m0 cannot be merged with m1 even if we
perform CM again because the dependency arc “nsubj:pass”
belongs to core arguments. In contrast, if we perform CM
again to the hypergraph, m2 will be merged with m1. More
visualizations for CM can be found in the Appendix E.
Pooling Layer.
The main function that pooling layers per-
form is to map the node representations from input graph G
to its coarsened hypergraph G′. To achieve the mapping, we
rely on the matching matrix that we get during graph pooling.
Each graph pooling process generates a coarsened hyper-
graph. Performing matching L times produces L hypergraphs
with increasing coarsening levels, denoted as G0, G1, ..., GL,
where G0 is the initial document graph. We use the match-
ing matrix Ml−1,l to mathematically represent the merging
process from level l −1 to level l 4.
2We deﬁne the set T as {all dependency edges and coref-
erence edges} \ {“nsubj”, “nsubj:pass”, “dobj”, “iobj”, “csubj”,
“csubj:pass”, “ccomp”, “xcomp”}.
3When moving edges from children nodes to supernodes, we do
not include self-loop causing by merging.
4The matching matrix can be obtained together with the graph
pooling algorithm. We omit the matching matrix calculation step in
our Algorithm 1 block for simplicity.
Ml−1,l ∈Rn×m converts Gl−1 ∈Rn×n to Gl ∈Rm×m
with n ≥m. Each cell mij in Ml−1,l is:
mij =
(
1,
if node i is matched into supernode j.
0,
otherwise.
(2)
With Ml−1,l constructed, we can compute the adjacency
matrix of level l, Al, based on Al−15:
Al = M T
l−1,lAl−1Ml−1,l,
(3)
and perform representation mapping to get the initial node
embeddings for the next level’s graph Gl:
Hin
l
= Ml−1,lHout
l−1,
(4)
where Hout
l−1 and Hin
l
represent the output node embedding
of Gl−1 and the input embedding of Gl.
2.3
Graph Unpooling
After layers of graph pooling, the model can encode node
information that are originally far in the input graph. The
unpooling branch is then designed to restore the information
to the original resolution. Speciﬁcally, the unpooling layers
use the matching matrices, which are generated during graph
pooling, to perform reverse operations, including generating
larger graphs and mapping the embeddings from coarsened
graphs to unpooled graphs. We denote the unpooling layer’s
function on l-th graph embedding as:
U in
l−1 = M T
l−1,lU out
l
.
(5)
To reinforce the learning of graph nodes, each unpooling layer
is followed by a GNN block to ﬁnetune node representations
in the graph. The function is written as ]
U out
l−1 = fGNN(U in
l−1),
as shown in Figure 26. Additionally, to combine the informa-
tion at different scales, we add residual connections (He et al.
2016) to reﬁne our representation, i.e. U out
l−1 = ]
U out
l−1 + Hout
l−1.
2.4
Apply to Relation Extraction
The token embeddings obtained after our pooling-unpooling
framework encode comprehensive features. In this paper, we
use these features for DRE tasks with minimal design in order
to test the quality of the extracted mention representation.
Given an entity mention span, we simply extract the corre-
sponding mention representation by using max-pooling on
the tokens within the given span. This setting is commonly
used in previous works (Guo, Zhang, and Lu 2019). When
prediction relations between entity mentions, we then con-
catenate all the targeting entity mention representations with
additional max-pooled sentence embedding, and then feed
them into linear layers to get the mention-pair score. If the
DRE dataset only provides relation labels at the entity level,
we follow Jia, Wong, and Poon (2019) to use the LogSumExp
to aggregate information from multiple mention-pairs:
score(E1, E2) = log
X
e1∈E1,e2∈E2
exp(g(e1, e2)),
(6)
where score(E1, E2) is the ﬁnal logit for entity pair (E1,
E2), and g(e1, e2) is the mention-pair score for the given
mention tuple e1 and e2.
5A0 is the adjacency matrix of input document graph.
6We use GCN (Kipf and Welling 2017) as our GNN in this work.

Model
Detection
Classiﬁcation
Ternary Binary Ternary Binary
Graph LSTM (Peng et al. 2017)
80.7
76.7
-
-
AGGCN∗(Guo et al. 2019)
76.7
79.0
67.5
67.9
GloVe
Embedding
Pooling (HM) (ours)
82.2
80.8
76.2
75.1
Pooling (CM) (ours)
82.5
80.8
75.4
73.4
SciBERT
Finetune
83.2
82.7
78.5
76.8
GCN
83.7
83.1
78.9
77.2
Pooling (HM) (ours)
84.4
83.4
79.6
78.0
Pooling (CM) (ours)
84.5
83.4
79.1
78.0
Table 1: Results of ﬁve-fold cross-validation on the n-ary
dataset in average accuracy(%). ∗indicates our re-run via
their release code with hyperparameter tuning.
3
Experiments
To instantiate our proposed pooling-unpooling framework,
we choose to use GCN (Kipf and Welling 2017) as the GNN
block to conduct our experiments on two DRE datasets. First,
we perform experiments on the Cross-sentence n-ary dataset,
a DRE dataset focusing on mention-level relations. This is
to test the quality of our extracted mention representations.
Then, we experiment on the Chemical-Disease Reactions
dataset, a DRE dataset studying entity-level relations. Exper-
iments on CDR can justify whether our method can capture
entity-level relations even with minimal design. Dataset statis-
tics and the best hyper-parameters are in Appendix B&C.
3.1
Cross-sentence n-ary Dataset
Data and Task Settings: The cross-sentence n-ary dataset
(n-ary) (Peng et al. 2017) contains drug-gene-mutation
ternary and drug-mutation binary relations annotated via
distant supervision (Mintz et al. 2009). Data is categorized
with 5 classes: “resistance or non-response”, “sensitivity”,
“response”, “resistance”, and “None”. Following prior works,
the detection task treats all relation labels except “None” as
True. In the experiments, we replace target entity mentions
with dummy tokens to prevent the classiﬁer from simply
memorizing the entity name. This is a standard practice in
distant supervision RE (Jia, Wong, and Poon 2019)7. The
document graphs of the dataset are provided in the origi-
nal release. All other data setup follows Song et al. (2018).
Our evaluation follows previous measurements – average
accuracy of 5-fold cross-validation.
Compared baselines:
(1) Graph LSTM (Peng et al.
2017), which modiﬁes the LSTM structures so that they can
encode graphical inputs. (2) AGGCN (Guo, Zhang, and Lu
2019), which is a GCN-based model with adjacency ma-
trices that operate in the GCN being adjusted by attention
mechanism. (3) Finetune pretrained word representations.
7We call this setting Entity Anonymity in contrast to the setting
where all tokens are exposed, denoted as Entity Identity setup. Prior
works are inconsistent w.r.t. this experimental detail. Speciﬁcally,
Peng et al. (2017) conducted experiments under Entity Anonymity
setup, while Song et al. (2018) and Guo, Zhang, and Lu (2019)
reported results under Entity Identity setup. For fair comparisons,
we report our results under Entity Identity in the Appendix A.
Model
Test F1
Static Emb
GCCN (Sahu et al. 2019)
62.3
EOG (Christopoulou et al. 2019)
63.6
LSR (Nan et al. 2020)
64.8
EoGANE (Tran et al. 2020)
66.1
GCN (our implementation)
62.7
Pooling (HM) (ours)†
64.7
Pooling (CM) (ours)†
65.6
BERT Large
SSANBiafﬁne (Xu et al. 2021)
65.3
GCN (our implementation)
65.1
Pooling (HM) (ours)
66.1
Pooling (CM) (ours)†
66.3
SciBERT
SSANBiafﬁne (Xu et al. 2021)
68.7
ATLOP (Zhou et al. 2021)
69.4
ATLOP∗(Zhou et al. 2021)
69.1
GCN (our implementation)
66.8
Pooling (HM) (ours)†
68.0
Pooling (CM) (ours)†
68.2
Table 2: Results measured in F1(%) on CDR dataset. The
underlined numbers representing the second best scores and
the bold numbers are the best for each fair comparison. ∗
indicates our re-run using their released code with 3 runs
and select the best run. † indicates the model outperforms its
corresponding GCN baseline signiﬁcantly (with p-value <
0.05 per McNemar’s test).
Considering that the n-ary dataset is in biomedical domain,
we use SciBERT (Beltagy, Lo, and Cohan 2019). (4) GCN
with pretrained word representations, which add additional
GCN layers after pretrained word representation layers.
Results on n-ary dataset:
Table 1 shows the comparison
on the n-ary dataset. We report results of our method, Pooling-
Unpooling(HM) and Pooling-Unpooling(CM), representing
our method with Hybrid Matching and with Clause Matching,
respectively. To fairly compare our method with baselines
without contextualized word representation (Graph LSTM
and AGGCN), we also report our result with GloVe embed-
ding (Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014).
Comparing to prior works without contextualized word
representation, the results show that both of our methods
surpass the baseline by at least 1.8% average accuracy. Un-
der the situation of using pretrained SciBERT, our results
consistently outperform the GCN baseline, which indicates
that the pooling-unpooling framework is helpful to learn a
better mention representation for DRE tasks. Additionally,
the result of GCN consistently outperforms SciBERT ﬁne-
tuning. This provides empirical evidence that the learning of
structure dependencies is helpful to perform DRE tasks even
though a strong pretrained word representation is provided.
Lastly, we compare CM with HM. In contrast of HM that
takes all edges into consideration, CM only uses the depen-
dency arc types to group nodes. In the original document
graph in n-ary dataset, there are some missing dependency
edges, which prevents CM from merging nodes. HM, which
can address the situation because of its consideration on over-
all graph structure, shows its robustness under this condition.

67.8
65.9
66.1
67.8
69.6
70.6
69.2
64.8
68.2
65.4
69.8
69
70.7
65.6
67.4
69.5
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
(0, 175]
(175, 275]
(275, 375]
(375, inf]
F1 Scores(%)
Input Text Length
Performance v.s Input Text Length
GCN
ScieBERT-ATLOP
Pooling-Unpooling(HM)
Pooling-Unpooling(CM)
75.8
66.3
58.8
60.5
83.1
67.1
56
58.3
77.6
67
59.3
63.4
79.2
67.2
58.1
64.5
50
54
58
62
66
70
74
78
82
(0, 4]
(4, 6]
(6, 8]
(8, inf]
F1 Scores(%)
Entity Distance in Graph
Performance v.s Entity Distance
Figure 5: Models’ performance against input text length and the entity distance in graph.
Although getting into the situation, CM still achieves com-
petitive results with HM. This highlights the importance of
considering edge type information in the graph pooling stage.
3.2
Chemical-Disease Reactions Dataset
Data and Task Settings: The Chemical-disease reactions
dataset (CDR) (Li et al. 2016) is a DRE task that focuses
on entity level relations. No document graph is provided in
the original CDR datset, so we generate its document graph
using Stanford CoreNLP (Manning et al. 2014). We follow
Christopoulou, Miwa, and Ananiadou (2019)8 to train the
model in two steps. First, we train our model using stan-
dard training set and record the best hyperparameter when
the model reaches optimal on the development set. Then,
the model is re-trained using the union of the training and
development data for ﬁnal test.
Compared baselines:
We consider prior literature on the
CDR dataset (Sahu et al. 2019; Christopoulou, Miwa, and
Ananiadou 2019; Nan et al. 2020; Tran, Nguyen, and Nguyen
2020; Xu et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2021). Among these works,
SSAN (Xu et al. 2021) studies on the most similar goals to
us, i.e, toward achieving better entity mention representation
for DRE tasks. Hence, we conduct experiments like them,
which studies different word representations, BERT Large
(Devlin et al. 2019) and SciBERT (Beltagy, Lo, and Cohan
2019). To fairly compare with the baselines, we also include
our results with static embeddings. 9 Additionally, we add
a GCN baseline to verify the effectiveness of our proposed
pooling-unpooling mechanism.
Results on CDR dataset:
The result is shown in Table 2.
First, we compare our method with prior works. Our models
can surpass most of the previous works even with minimal
8We also follow them to use (1) GENIA Sentence Splitter for
sentence splitting (2) GENIA Tagger (Tsuruoka et al. 2005) for
tokenization (3) PudMed pre-trained word embeddings (Chiu et al.
2016) for static embedings.
9Our models with static embeddings contains additional LSTM
layers after the static word embedding. This is a fair comparison
setting with other baselines using static embeddings.
design on aggregating information from mention representa-
tions to entity embeddings. Then, we compare our method
with SSAN. Although SSAN ﬁnishes with a slightly better
test F1 score with SciBERT (0.5 F1 difference), our models
outperform them under the condition of using BERT Large
with a 1.2 F1 margin. Third, from the table, we observe that
CM is able to outperform HM on all three situation. This,
again, veriﬁes the effectiveness of CM.
Lastly, we study the effectiveness of the proposed pooling-
unpooling framework. Comparing our pooling-unpooling
models with our GCN baselines, the pooling-unpooling mod-
els achieve signiﬁcant improvement regardless of which pre-
trained word representation being used.
3.3
Studies
In this section, we perform studies to better understand our
method. Speciﬁcally, we provide analysis on two questions:
(1) whether the pooling-unpooling mechanism helps the learn-
ing of long-term dependencies; (2) how sensitive is our model
regarding the quality of graph pooling?
The learning for long-term dependencies:
To answer the
ﬁrst question, we analyze our model by examining (1) the
model’s performance against the input text length, (2) the
model’s performance against the entity distance in the in-
put document graph10. We conduct experiments on the CDR
dataset using models with SciBERT and report the results
that evaluated on the test set. We compare our models with
our GCN baseline and SciBERT-ATLOP (Zhou et al. 2021),
and present the comparison in Figure 5. From the ﬁgure, we
observe that models with pooling-unpooling can perform bet-
ter for cases that need to resolve long dependencies (instances
with larger entity distances or instances with longer inputs).
Models using different graph pooling algorithm:
We
conduct experiments with models using different graph pool-
ing methods to test how our method is affected by the graph
10We compute the entity distance in the graph by ﬁrst calculating
the minimum distance between each targeting mention-pair in the
graph, then taking the maximum distance among all mention-pairs.
Such a design is to estimate the largest effort for models to capture
the current relations.

Model
Dev F1
GCN
68.4
Pooling-Unpooling (HM)
69.2
Pooling-Unpooling (CM)
69.5
Pooling-Unpooling (Random Pooling)
68.6
Pooling-Unpooling (Aggressive HM)
69.4
Pooling-Unpooling (Aggressive CM)
68.9
Table 3: Models’ performance with various graph pooling
methods. The experiments are measured in F1(%) on the
development set of the CDR dataset.
pooling algorithm. We consider three additional pooling
methods: (1) Pooling-Unpooling (Random Pooling): mod-
els with random pooling strategy. During graph pooling, each
edge has the probability of 0.5 to be used for merging nodes;
(2) Pooling-Unpooling (Aggressive HM): for each graph
pooling layer, i.e, from Gi to Gi+1, we perform HM twice.
That is, the size of the output graph after one aggressive HM
is much smaller than that after one standard HM; (3) Pooling-
Unpooling (Aggressive CM): similar to aggressive HM, we
perform twice CM for each graph pooling layer. We run ex-
periments on the CDR dataset with SciBERT embedding and
report the performance on the development set in Table 3.
From the table, we observe that: (1) The pooling quality is
important. Comparing random pooling with other variations,
we see that the result is almost the same as pure GCN. (2)
Aggressive HM can achieve even better results than HM, yet,
aggressive CM yields worse results than CM. We hypothesize
that this is because CM has already been more aggressive
than HM. Based on our statistics, the averaged graph size
for the development size in CDR is 258.39 tokens. After
one HM pooling, the averaged graph size reduces to 150.45,
while the average graph size after CM decreases to 90.34.
Hence, performing aggressive CM may lead to information
loss because of being too aggressive, yet aggressive HM can
make the receptive ﬁelds being enlarged more efﬁciently. To
sum up, the pooling quality matters in our framework, and
how to get the best graph pooling approach is still an area
that needs more exploration.
4
Related work
Discourse-level Relation Extraction. There have been
growing interests for studying relation extraction beyond
single sentence. Many of these works (Guo, Zhang, and Lu
2019; Gupta et al. 2019; Guo et al. 2020) introduce intra- and
inter-sentential structure dependencies, such as dependency
trees, to help capture representations for target mentions. Var-
ious GNNs are proposed and applied to encode this structural
information (Peng et al. 2017; Song et al. 2018; Xu et al.
2021). Yet, their model designs mostly neglect the efforts
of their models to capture long-term dependencies when the
input graph growing to discourse level.
Another thread of works on DRE is to identify relations of
entity pairs (i.e., relations between entities rather than a single
pair of mentions) from the entire document (Jia, Wong, and
Poon 2019; Christopoulou, Miwa, and Ananiadou 2019; Zeng
et al. 2020; Zhou et al. 2021). Jia, Wong, and Poon (2019)
propose a multiscale learning paradigm, which learns ﬁnal
relation representations by gradually constructing mention-
level, entity-level representation. Christopoulou, Miwa, and
Ananiadou (2019) use rules to build edge representation from
extracted nodes and study on using edge representations to
make ﬁnal prediction. Zeng et al. (2020) ﬁrst extract men-
tion representations using a simple encoder, and then design
mention-level and entity-level graphs to capture the inter-
play among mentions and entities. These methods mostly
put emphasis on learning the interaction between the men-
tion representations and entity embeddings, while our main
goal is to learn better mention representations that capture
long-term dependencies.
Graph Pooling in NLP.
Graph pooling is a classic idea to
learn representations associated with graph and can largely
preserve the graph structure (Duvenaud et al. 2015; Chen
et al. 2018a). There are a few works that leverage the idea for
NLP tasks. (Gao, Chen, and Ji 2019) adopts graph pooling
to aggregate local features for global text representation, via
an architecture without the unpooling operation, which dif-
fers from our work. Nguyen and Grishman (2018) has also
explored the idea of pooling with GCN, but their pooling is
conducted on features instead of the input graph. To the best
of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to apply the idea of graph
pooling to relation extraction task.
Pooling-unpooling Mechanism.
The pooling-unpooling
mechanism is widely-used for pixel-wise representation learn-
ing (Badrinarayanan, Kendall, and Cipolla 2017; Chen et al.
2018b), which use downsampling and upsampling operation
to aggregate information from different resolution. The ﬂag-
ship work of such paradigm is U-Net (Ronneberger, Fischer,
and Brox 2015), which demonstrates the effectiveness in the
image segmentation. It is worth mentioning that (Gao and
Ji 2019; Hu et al. 2019) also adopt such paradigm for graph
node and graph classiﬁcation task, and shares similarity with
our work from the architectural perspective. However, the
main contribution of them is the specially-designed pooling
and unpooling operations or the application toward semi-
supervised setting. In contrast, our work focuses on studying
the effectiveness of such framework in DRE to help alleviate
the efforts for GNNs to capture long-term dependencies when
given long context. Besides, we propose a domain-speciﬁc
designed pooling method and show competitive results.
5
Conclusion and Future Work
In this work, we explore the effectiveness of applying graph
pooling-unpooling mechanism for learning better mention
representations for DRE tasks. Such paradigm help the used
graph neural networks capture long dependencies given large
input document graphs. Besides, we introduce a new graph
pooling strategy that is tailored for NLP tasks.
For the future work, we plan to explore the possibility of ap-
plying the pooling-unpooling mechanism to other document-
level NLP tasks. We also plan to propose differentiable,
feature-selection free pooling methods that consider edge
types to better handle NLP tasks.
