Robust Blockchained Federated Learning
with Model Validation and Proof-of-Stake Inspired Consensus
Hang Chen,1 Syed Ali Asif,1 Jihong Park,2 Chien-Chung Shen,1 Mehdi Bennis3
1 Department of Computer and Information Sciences, University of Delaware, USA
2 School of Information Technology, Deakin University, Australia
3 Centre for Wireless Communications, University of Oulu, Finland

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) is a promising distributed learning
solution that only exchanges model parameters without re-
vealing raw data. However, the centralized architecture of FL
is vulnerable to the single point of failure. In addition, FL
does not examine the legitimacy of local models, so even a
small fraction of malicious devices can disrupt global train-
ing. To resolve these robustness issues of FL, in this pa-
per, we propose a blockchain-based decentralized FL frame-
work, termed VBFL, by exploiting two mechanisms in a
blockchained architecture. First, we introduced a novel de-
centralized validation mechanism such that the legitimacy of
local model updates is examined by individual validators.
Second, we designed a dedicated proof-of-stake consensus
mechanism where stake is more frequently rewarded to hon-
est devices, which protects the legitimate local model up-
dates by increasing their chances of dictating the blocks ap-
pended to the blockchain. Together, these solutions promote
more federation within legitimate devices, enabling robust
FL. Our emulation results of the MNIST classiﬁcation cor-
roborate that with 15% of malicious devices, VBFL achieves
87% accuracy, which is 7.4x higher than Vanilla FL.
Introduction
Fundamental requirements of machine learning rest on se-
curing a large volume of high-quality data that accurately re-
ﬂects the current environments or situations. In search of the
sheer amount of fresh data, networked edge devices, such as
phones, cameras, and Internet of Things (IoT), from which
the freshest data are generated have recently attracted signif-
icant attention (Park et al. 2019a,b, 2020). However, collect-
ing their raw data brings about non-negligible latency and
security issues, as these user-generated data are dispersed
across devices and often privacy sensitive, e.g., location his-
tory and health records. In this respect, federated learning
(FL) is a convincing solution that periodically exchanges lo-
cal model parameters, rather than instantaneously exchang-
ing raw data (McMahan et al. 2017; Kairouz et al. 2019;
He et al. 2020). In essence, FL constructs a global model
by aggregating local models at a central server. While ef-
fective under benign environments, this simple operational
principle of FL leads to two robustness issues in reality as
elaborated next.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Figure 1: Global model accuracy comparison between
Vanilla FL and VBFL, with and without malicious devices
in the MNIST classiﬁcation.
First, FL is vulnerable to the single point of failure due to
its central parameter server aggregating local models to con-
struct a global model (Bonawitz et al. 2019; Elgabli et al.
2020). To address this issue, blockchain-based FL is one
promising decentralized solution, yet with a large number
of devices, its proof-of-work (PoW) consensus delays are
signiﬁcant (Kim et al. 2019). Second, FL is not capable
of ﬁltering out malfunction or malicious attacks during the
global model construction. As observed by our MNIST ex-
periments depicted in Fig. 1, the global model accuracy of
the most basic form of FL, termed Vanilla FL, can collapse
with only 15% of malicious devices injecting Gaussian noise
into their local models. A na¨ıve solution is to compare the
accuracy evaluated on each local model with others (Sheller
et al. 2020). However, such a method is not viable under a
decentralized architecture due to the lack of models for com-
parison, because not all local models can be easily collected
at a single location within the limited time.
To resolve the two aforementioned robustness issues of
FL, we propose a novel blockchained FL framework, coined
VBFL, by introducing (1) a validation mechanism that ex-
amines and votes on local model updates in a decentral-
ized manner and (2) a proof-of-stake (PoS) inspired consen-
sus mechanism that allows devices making the most learn-
ing contributions to create legitimate blocks recording lo-
cal model updates with their corresponding voting results.
In VBFL, at every communication round, each device pos-
sessing its local dataset is randomly appointed as: (i) a ma-
chine learning worker updating its local model, (ii) a model

validator examining and voting on the legitimacy of the re-
ceived local model updates, or (iii) a blockchain miner1 at-
tempting to incorporate voting results with the correspond-
ing local models to be stored in the next consensual block.
Given this role-switching policy, VBFL aims to promote
more federation within legitimate devices via the following
complementary mechanisms.
• Decentralized Model Validation: Once a local model
update is received by a validator, the validator broadcasts
this update to other validators and runs training using its
own local dataset for a single epoch to evaluate the accu-
racy of the received model. From our experimental obser-
vations, illegitimate models of malicious devices exhibit
noticeably steep accuracy drops after such extra training
due to their maliciously distorted models. By exploiting
this phenomenon, a validator casts its vote on the legit-
imacy of each model. Based on the accumulated votes
from multiple validators, potential malicious devices as-
sociated with illegitimate models are kicked out from the
VBFL operations. Moreover, our experiments show that a
few compromised validators cannot disrupt the validation
results as the validating operations are decentralized.
• PoS-inspired Consensus: The consensus mechanism of
VBFL is inspired by proof-of-stake (PoS) (King and
Nadal 2012), which allows the device serving the role
of miner that has made the most learning contributions
among the assigned miners in each communication round
(i.e., the device that has been mostly cumulatively re-
warded among the devices that are assigned to miners)
to create the legitimate block recording local model up-
dates with their corresponding voting results. Rewards are
granted to each device, and become a part of the stake of
the device, based on the role of (i), (ii), or (iii) it plays
in each round. The stake of each device is recorded in
the blockchain and recognized by the devices in the net-
work. Owing to the validation mechanism, malicious de-
vices are less likely to frequently receive the rewards for
playing workers, which in turn decreases their accumu-
lated rewards (i.e., stake), thus mitigating their chance of
being selected as the winning-miner. Additionally, our ex-
periments suggest that the proposed PoS-inspired consen-
sus is much more communication-efﬁcient compared to
the PoW-based approach due to the shorter block gener-
ation time, while the frequency of forking events is still
comparable according to our emulation results.
A high-level overview of the described VBFL operations in-
volving 1 worker, 3 validators and 2 miners is depicted in
Fig. 2. Consequently, even with 15% of malicious devices,
Fig. 1 shows that VBFL achieves 87% accuracy, which is
7.4x higher than Vanilla FL without the proposed validation
and PoS enhancements. Note that VBFL is the ﬁrst PoS-
based blockchained FL system practically implemented us-
ing Python, in contrast to existing blockchained FL works
1In Ethereum (Buterin 2014) and other PoS-based blockchains,
it is common that validators cast votes for generating a consen-
sual block. In VBFL, to distinguish the role of voting for legiti-
mate models and that of creating consensual blocks, validators and
miners are used, respectively.
(a) Voting and transmission of local model updates.
(b) Voting results aggregation, block generation and block pro-
cessing (i.e., global model and stake information update).
Figure 2: VBFL operations in one communication round.
(Kang et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020; Awan et al. 2019; Qu et al.
2019; Bonawitz et al. 2019; Ma et al. 2020) that commonly
rely on mathematical modeling and/or algorithmic simpli-
ﬁcations (e.g., synchronous mining operations (Kim et al.
2019)). Our VBFL prototype is open-source and available
at: https://github.com/hanglearning/VBFL.
Related Work
FL addressed research issues of data privacy and data hetero-
geneity for collaborative machine learning (ML) (Kairouz
et al. 2019; He et al. 2020). To handle the issue of
single-point-of-failure in FL, blockchain decentralizes the
aggregation of local updates (Ramanan, Nakayama, and
Sharma 2019; Awan et al. 2019; Ma et al. 2020). Moreover,
blockchain-based FL facilitates traceability, auditability, and
tamper-proof to ensure reliable and trustworthy learning
processes (Bonawitz et al. 2019; Yuan, Ge, and Xing 2020;
Lyu et al. 2020). Blockchain-based Smart Contracts (SC)
were used (Ramanan, Nakayama, and Sharma 2019) to elim-
inate limitations of aggregators in the FL environment using
a large Deep Neural Network (DNN) model. Furthermore,
using blockchain, one study (Lyu et al. 2020) described a lo-
cal credibility mutual evaluation mechanism for fairness and
a multi-layer encryption scheme for accuracy and privacy for
DL models. However, the works did not focus on the consen-
sus protocols regarding poisoning attacks, which left room
for performance degradation and vulnerability if there exist
malicious and/or compromised nodes in the system upload-
ing noisy local updates for global model construction.

An approach was devised (Kang et al. 2020) to guaran-
tee reliability by utilizing the reputation of the contributing
nodes to select trusted worker nodes for enhancing the per-
formance of model training. The inspiration came from rep-
utation usage in solving the data quality problems in crowd-
sensing and the multi-weighted subjective logic model uti-
lizing the degree of belief, distrust, and uncertainty to com-
pute reputation. However, the storage of reputation into a
separate consortium blockchain results in overhead (Kang
et al. 2020). A committee consensus for a decentralized
blockchain-based DL framework (Li et al. 2020) was pro-
posed to deal with the malicious worker updates. In the ap-
proach, the authors constructed a committee overseeing and
testing the worker nodes’ local model updates by validating
with their own data and calculating a validation score. The
authors followed the Byzantine Fault Tolerance (BFT) pro-
tocol for safeguarding the operations of the method (Li et al.
2020).
The theoretical studies by the authors (Kim et al. 2019)
planned a proof-of-work (PoW) based on-device FL archi-
tecture for DL applications by analyzing end-to-end latency
and deriving optimal block generation rate for better scalable
performance. An energy recycling Proof of Federated Learn-
ing (PoFL) approach with reverse game-based data trading
and a privacy-preserving model veriﬁcation method over-
came latency drawback of PoW and data privacy leakage
during model training and veriﬁcation in FL but failed to
address the poisoning attacks (Qu et al. 2019). Other stud-
ies such as (Fung, Yoon, and Beschastnikh 2018) targeted
speciﬁc poisoning attacks (Sybil Attacks) on FL and pro-
posed mitigation strategy based on dissecting the diversity
of the local model updates. Speciﬁcally, too many similar
updates from a group of nodes are labeled as malicious and
treated accordingly. Additionally, in (Liu et al. 2020) a cen-
tral aggregator recognized malicious and unreliable partici-
pants by automatically executing smart contracts to defend
against poisoning attacks, and various local differential pri-
vacy techniques were used to prevent membership inference
attacks on the system (Liu et al. 2020). Nevertheless, com-
plications from having a central aggregator such as bias to-
wards selective worker nodes (Ramanan, Nakayama, and
Sharma 2019) could still corrupt the FL process, which was
addressed and eliminated by the role-switching policy in our
approach.
In a comparative analysis of consensus algorithms in
blockchain, the authors discussed PoW, PoS, and BFT algo-
rithms (Bach, Mihaljevic, and Zagar 2018). PoW (Kim et al.
2019) based approach incurs more latency and communica-
tion overhead. BFT based approaches (Li et al. 2020) work
in the permissioned blockchains and affect the anonymity
of the participant nodes. Moreover, the reported results
achieved 90% accuracy when there are 50% malicious nodes
involved, but the validation method used in the approach
are not explained in details (Li et al. 2020). Hence, no con-
crete comparative analysis could be performed with their ap-
proach. (Kang et al. 2020) only reported the effects of adding
reputation to the validation process in FL rather than de-
tailing the impact of reputation to mitigate the adversities
caused by malicious nodes making the experimental results
Symbols
Meaning
d ∈D
A device in the Device Set
w ∈W
A worker in the Worker Set
v ∈V
A validator in the Validator Set
m ∈M
A miner in the Miner Set
Rj
The j-th communication round
traind
Private training set of device d
testd
Private test set of device d
Ld
j
Locally updated model by device d in round Rj
Gj
Global model constructed at the end of round Rj
txw
j
Worker-transaction containing Lw
j initiated and signed by worker w in Rj
Av(Ld
j)
Accuracy of Ld
j evaluated by validator v using test set testv in Rj
vtv(Lw
j )
Voting result on Lw
j from validator v
txv
j(Lw
j )
Validator-transaction containing txw
j and vtv(Lw
j ) initiated by v in Rj
vtm,V(Lw
j )
Aggregated voting results from V on Lw
j , collected by m
rd
j
Rewards to device d in round Rj
blockm
j
The candidate block initiated by the miner m in round Rj
blockj
The legitimate block produced by the winning-miner in round Rj
KickR
Blacklist the w who is identiﬁed as malicious for KickR rounds
Table 1: List of Notations
unclear. Due to the lack of existing works on proof-of-stake
(PoS) based blockchained FL and based on the studies men-
tioned above and other ﬁndings, we propose a PoS-based
validator-voting scheme for blockchain-based FL, as an al-
ternative approach to the existing works to dilute the adverse
inﬂuence of malicious nodes in a blockchained FL system.
Operations of VBFL
VBFL is operated by a set of devices D = {d1, d2, · · · , dn},
and, similar to Vanilla FL, carries out the learning pro-
cesses through a sequence of communication rounds R =
⟨R1, R2, Rj, · · · ⟩. In each round, each device d ∈D is as-
signed to one of the following roles: worker w ∈W, valida-
tor v ∈V, and miner m ∈M, where |W|+|V|+|M| = |D|,
and performs its function according to the role assigned. The
id of a device is its public key, which is used to verify the
signatures of transactions or blocks generated by the device.
For consistency, we denote a learning device in Vanilla FL
as w as well, as a learning device in Vanilla FL plays the
worker role in VBFL.
A local model update by worker w in communication
round Rj, denoted as Lw
j , is generated by performing lo-
cal learning on the global model constructed in round Rj−1,
denoted as Gj−1. In Vanilla FL, Lw
j is directly used to com-
pute Gj, whereas in VBFL, Lw
j would go through a vali-
dation process performed by all v ∈V before being used to
construct Gj. In addition, worker w computes its expected
rewards rw
j for learning Lw
j by following the reward mech-
anism of VBFL-PoS. Worker w then encapsulates both Lw
j
and rw
j in a worker-transaction txw
j signed by w’s private
key, and sends txw
j to a randomly associated validator. Each
validator v then obtains txw
j from all of its associated work-
ers, and broadcasts txw
j to all the other validators. By do-
ing so, each v ∈V would have txw
j , for all w ∈W, so that
it could vote on each Lw
j . Rewards rw
j are granted to w if
Lw
j is voted Positive in the aggregated voting results from V
recorded in the legitimate block of Rj, denoted as blockj.
Validator v receives a veriﬁcation-reward, rv-veri
j
, by ver-
ifying the signature of one worker-transaction txw
j . If the
signature of transaction txw
j is veriﬁed, v would extract Lw
j
from txw
j and cast a vote on Lw
j , denoted as vtv(Lw
j ), as

being either Positive or Negative, according to the VBFL’s
validator voting mechanism. The voting mechanism requires
each v to perform one-epoch of local model update by using
its own local training set trainv, which will be elaborated
in the section of VBFL Validator Voting Mechanism. Val-
idator v also receives a validation-reward, rv-vali
j
, by voting
on one Lw
j . Then, txw
j , vtv(Lw
j ), rv-veri
j
and rv-vali
j
would
be encapsulated in a validator-transaction txv
j(Lw
j ) signed
by v’s private key. Each m then receives txv
j(Lw
j ) from its
associated v, and broadcasts txv
j(Lw
j ) to all the other min-
ers. By doing so, each m ∈M would have txv
j(Lw
j ), for
all v ∈V, and therefore each m would have access to every
voting result vtv(Lw
j ) for all Lw
j , w ∈W, by every v ∈V.
Miner m receives a veriﬁcation-reward, rm-veri
j
, by veri-
fying the signature of one txv
j(Lw
j ). If the signature is ver-
iﬁed, m would extract vtv(Lw
j ) from txv
j(Lw
j ). For all the
extracted vtv(Lw
j ), m would aggregate the voting results
that vote on the same Lw
j by each v ∈V into vtm,V(Lw
j ).
Then, all the aggregated voting results {vtm,V(Lw
j )}, for
all w ∈W, are put inside of a privately constructed candi-
date block blockm
j . The candidate block would also contain
all the expected rewards rw
j , rv-veri
j
, rv-vali
j
and rm-veri
j
.
Miner m then mines its own candidate block according to
the VBFL-PoS consensus by hashing the entire block con-
tent and signing the hash by its private key. This is equivalent
to the 0-difﬁculty PoW mining.
For example, consider two workers W = {w1, w2} and
three validators V = {v1, v2, v3} in Rj. After w1 gen-
erates Lw1
j , Lw1
j
would be obtained by each v ∈V due
to the broadcast among V, and the same for Lw2
j . Sup-
pose all the validators have voted on both Lw1
j
and Lw2
j ,
and vtv1(Lw1
j ) = vtv3(Lw1
j ) = Positive, vtv2(Lw1
j ) = Neg-
ative. Suppose there are two miners M = {m1, m2}. After
m1 and m2 aggregate the voting results, both vtm1,V(Lw1
j )
and vtm2,V(Lw1
j ) would be equal to {2Positive, 1Negative}.
Similarly, assume vtv1(Lw2
j ) = vtv2(Lw2
j ) = vtv3(Lw2
j ) =
Negative, which results in vtm1,V(Lw2
j ) = vtm2,V(Lw2
j ) =
{0Positive, 3Negative}. Finally, m1 puts vtm1,V(Lw1
j ) and
vtm1,V(Lw2
j ) into its candidate block blockm1
j
, and m2 puts
vtm2,V(Lw1
j ) and vtm2,V(Lw2
j ) into blockm2
j
.
Upon blockm
j
is mined, miner m propagates this mined
block to all the other miners in the network. After m mines
blockm
j
and receives all the propagated blocks in the net-
work, by tracking the stake information recorded on its
blockchain, m picks the block generated by the miner pos-
sessing the highest stake (i.e., accumulated rewards) among
M, as the legitimate block. Under VBFL-PoS, only this le-
gitimate block can be used to extract the rewards record
and the voting results with the corresponding model up-
dates. Each m would append this legitimate block to its own
blockchain, and request its associated w and v to down-
load this legitimate block to append to their blockchains
as well. In practice, instead of receiving all the propagated
blocks, miners have to set a time limit to accept the prop-
agated blocks (denoted as propagated-block-wait-time) in
case some blocks have a long transmission delay.
After a d being m, v or w appends a block, d pro-
cesses the appended block by performing the following two
tasks: (1) compute Gj by using those model updates with
the number of Postive votes no less than the number of
Negative votes, and (2) update each device’s stake by ac-
cumulating the recorded and qualiﬁed rewards. For exam-
ple, assume the legitimate block was mined by m2 as it
possesses more stake than m1, then each d would receive
vtm2,V(Lw1
j ) = {2Positive, 1Negative} and vtm2,V(Lw2
j ) =
{0Positive, 3Negative}. In this case, only Lw1
j
would be used
for the construction of Gj. Each device updates the stake
record for all d ∈D being w, v or m in Rj by accumu-
lating qualiﬁed rw
j , rv-veri
j
, rv-vali
j
and rm-veri
j
recorded in
the appended block. The tracked stake records are used by
miners to pick the legitimate block by comparing the stake-
holding among the block miners. Also under VBFL-PoS, if
an Lw
j receives more Negative votes than Positive votes such
as Lw2
j
in the above example, the corresponding worker (i.e.,
w2) would be ﬂagged as being potentially malicious so that
rewards (i.e., rw2
j ) would not be granted to this worker. If w
is ﬂagged as malicious for KickR consecutive communica-
tion rounds, each d should blacklist w and reject all future
communications from it.
The above descriptions assume VBFL runs in its most
ideal situation, which means all the transactions are well re-
ceived and veriﬁed, all the nodes have stable connections
with each other, and all the nodes have similar hardware
capability. Therefore, each m may end up with the same
block content, excluding its signature. In a practical situa-
tion, the blocks mined by M may have different contents
due to varying transmission delays incurred by transactions
and diverse hardware capacities of devices. Moreover, as
there may be purposeful attacks to the global model from
malicious miners, such as forging fake voting results with
fake validator signatures, it is critical to identify and only
use the voting results in the legitimate block to complete
global model updates, as the miner creating the legitimate
block is deemed the most trustworthy miner among M un-
der the VBFL-PoS consensus. The discussions of legitimate
block and winning-miner selection are in Section VBFL-
PoS Consensus Mechanism.
After a d constructs Gj, d concludes Rj and enters Rj+1.
The role of each d is reassigned in Rj+1 based on the role-
switching policy.
VBFL Validator Voting Mechanism
The Validator Voting Mechanism aims to exclude those
signiﬁcantly distorted Lw
j sent from malicious or compro-
mised workers (e.g., using abnormal datasets for training
or adding artiﬁcial noise to their models) from the con-
struction of Gj in Rj. Ideally, to validate Lw
j , a validator
v would like to compare the accuracy of Lw
j against the
accuracy of Gj−1, both evaluated with testw, denoted as
Aw(Lw
j ) and Aw(Gj−1), respectively, and hypothesize that
if Lw
j is severely distorted, Aw(Lw
j ) would reveal a steep
accuracy drop compared to Aw(Gj−1). On the other hand,

if Lw
j is legitimately learned, Lw
j would either yield higher
accuracy or suffer from minor accuracy drop compared to
Aw(Gj−1). However, since v in VBFL would only obtain
Lw
j but neither trainw nor testw, and a directly uploaded
value pair {Aw(Lw
j ), Aw(Gj−1)} cannot be trusted by v,
v would be in no reliable way to obtain the exact values
of both Aw(Lw
j ) and Aw(Gj−1). A workaround for v is
to compare Av(Lw
j ) against Av(Gj−1), and treat it as a
proxy comparison to Aw(Lw
j ) against Aw(Gj−1). The ra-
tional of such a proxy comparison is that if the data sets
possessed by w and v follow a similar distribution, Av(Lw
j )
and Aw(Lw
j ) should have little difference, and likewise for
Av(Gj−1) and Aw(Gj−1). As a result, v may subjectively
choose a threshold value, denoted as vhv
j, as a tolerance
of an accuracy-drop measurement between Av(Gj−1) and
Av(Lw
j ). If Av(Gj−1) −Av(Lw
j ) > vhv
j, which means the
accuracy drop exceeds v’s tolerance, v would ﬂag both Lw
j
and w as potentially malicious, resulting in a Negative vote
for Lw
j . Otherwise, v treats w as legitimate and casts a Posi-
tive vote.
We implemented this validation method for V in VBFL to
evaluate its effectiveness. In the experiments, we introduced
three malicious d along with 17 legitimate d into the VBFL
network. Although the role of each d was reassigned in a
new communication round, to focus on evaluating the effec-
tiveness, we enforced the same role-combination to devices
as 12 w’s, 5 v’s and 3 m’s in each round to guarantee that
there was enough number of W and V. When a malicious
d became a w, it would inject Gaussian noise of variance 1
to its legitimately learned local model parameters to simu-
late a distorted local model update sent to V. We randomly
sharded the MNIST training set to all 20 d ∈D, and each d
used the entire MNIST test set as its local test set.
We randomly selected some ﬁxed values for vhv
j (e.g.,
0.01, 0.1, 0.2) and kept a log for both correctly and in-
correctly identiﬁed malicious w and their corresponding
Av(Gj−1) −Av(Lw
j ) values. Unfortunately, this validation
method could not effectively identify the malicious w, and
the logged Av(Gj−1)−Av(Lw
j ) values exhibited an increas-
ing trend for all w ∈W and all v ∈V, showing virtually
no distinctive relationship between vhv
j and Av(Gj−1) −
Av(Lw
j ) for the legitimate and the malicious w’s. To inves-
tigate the reasons, we abided by the same data set sharding
rule in the above VBFL experiments, and ran three Vanilla
FL executions for 100 rounds with 20 legitimate w’s (i.e.,
learning devices) each performing 5 epochs of local training
during each round and plotted their learning curves. Fig. 3
displays the learning curve of one of the devices, say w, over
the ﬁrst 10 rounds. Below are the interpretations of Fig. 3:
• The peaks of accuracy values connected by the orange
line represent Aw(Gj), for j = 1, 2, ..., 10.
• Let the locally updated model of w after training Gj−1 for
n epochs in Rj be denoted as Lw
j (n). The accuracy val-
ues on the valleys correspond to the le (i.e., local epoch)
checkpoints. The accuracy at the point of jlen on the x-
axis represents Aw(Lw
j (n)).
Figure 3: A Typical Device’s Continuous Learning Curve in
Vanilla FL Using FedAvg (McMahan et al. 2017)
Observed from Fig. 3, we concluded that our hypothe-
sis was incorrect because a signiﬁcant difference between
Aw(Gj−1) and Aw(Lw
j ) (i.e., Aw(Lw
j (5)), as W in this
experiment perform 5 local epochs of training in each R)
means that a legitimate w also exhibits a sharp accuracy
drop. The rest 90 rounds of w and other legitimate learning
curves show the same trend of accuracy drop. It is also ob-
served that a sharp accuracy drop (i.e., from a peak to a val-
ley) starts taking place when w updates its local model from
Gj−1 to Lw
j (1). The range of this drop can be described as
Aw(Gj−1) −Aw(Lw
j (1)).
To proceed with this observation, one possible solution
is to get rid of Av(Gj−1), and let validator v ﬁrst per-
form one-epoch of legitimate local learning and calculate
Av(Lv
j(1)) as a proxy evaluation of Aw(Lw
j (1)), with the as-
sumption that w is legitimately learning Lw
j (1) as well. Val-
idator v would then calculate the validation accuracy differ-
ence vad = Av(Lv
j(1))−Av(Lw
j (n)) and compare vad with
a newly deﬁned validator-threshold value vhv
j to determine
whether Lw
j (n) is potentially distorted. By obtaining Lv
j(1),
v would be able to approximate Lw
j (1), bypassing the issue
of accuracy drop as both Av(Lv
j(1)) and Aw(Lw
j (1)) were
produced after an accuracy drop from Gj−1. The hypothesis
is that when a legitimate validator v produces Av(Lv
j(1)),
the value of vad = Av(Lv
j(1)) −Av(Lw
j (n)) must be dif-
ferent between the Lw
j (n) sent by a legitimate w and that by
a malicious w.
To ﬁnd the pattern of vad and its relationship with the
new vhv
j, we implemented this new validation method in
VBFL and evaluated it using the exact same experimental
setup with 3 malicious d and logged the values of vad for all
w ∈W and all v ∈V across 30 communication rounds. To
reduce complexity, when a malicious d became a v, it did not
execute any malicious action (e.g., ﬂipping the voting result,
etc.). Fig. 4 is a scatter plot that shows the values of vad for
every possible combinations of v and w for these 30 rounds.
The red dots represent the values of vad yielded by the mali-
cious w’s and the green dots denoted those by the legitimate
w’s. From Fig. 4 we observed that most red dots reside above
the line vad = 0.08. Therefore, if we let a v considers the w
with vad > 0.08 as a malicious w in each R, theoretically
v would be able to identify most of the distorted Lw
j (n) and
treat the corresponding w as malicious. Here we can treat

Figure 4: vad values for both malicious w and legitimate w.
the 0.08 value as the newly deﬁned validator-threshold vhv
j,
which deﬁnes the baseline of distinguishing maliciouos w
from legitimate w when measuring vad.
We evaluated the effectiveness of this validation method
in Section Experimental Results. In summary, our pro-
posed validator voting mechanism requires a validator v
in VBFL to perform one-epoch of local learning to get
Av(Lv
j(1)). After v receives a Lw
j (n), v evaluates Lw
j (n) on
its test set testv to get Av(Lw
j (n)), and calculates vad =
Av(Lv
j(1)) −Av(Lw
j (n)) to compare it with validator-
threshold vhv
j. If vad > vhv
j, v considers Lw
j (n) to be poten-
tially distorted and w to be likely malicious, and generates
a Negative vote for Lw
j (n). Otherwise, a Positive vote for
Lw
j (n) is generated. The proposed validation mechanism on
individual Lw
j is presented in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: ValidateByVoting Mechanism
1 For v ∈V;
2 Input: Lw
j (n), testv, Av(Lv
j(1)), vhv
j;
3 rv-vali
j
, Av(Lw
j (n)) ←v.Evaluate(Lw
j (n), testv);
4 if Av(Lv
j(1)) −Av(Lw
j (n)) > vhv
j then
5
vtv(Lw
j (n)) ←Negative;
6 else
7
vtv(Lw
j (n)) ←Positive;
8 return rv-vali
j
, vtv(Lw
j (n))
A limitation of ﬁnding vhv
j in our experiments is that vhv
j
was determined by examining the emulation logs, while in
practice, V would not have this ability in real time. We hy-
pothesize that the value of vhv
j may be adaptively learned
through examining all historical values of Av(Lv
j′(1)) −
Av(Lv
j′(n)) when v played the role of worker in Rj′, where
j′ < j, as the value of Av(Lv
j′(1)) −Av(Lv
j′(n)) would
subjectively give v a sense of approximating the vad of a
legitimate w. The study of vhv
j is deferred to future work.
VBFL-PoS Consensus Mechanism
VBFL-PoS Reward Mechanism
The VBFL-PoS Consensus Mechanism strives to protect the
legitimately learned local model updates and ensure those
updates are recorded on the blockchain and used for updat-
ing the global model. As miners are responsible for aggre-
gating the voting results and recording them in a block, when
a malicious device becomes a miner, it may try to disrupt the
global model’s calculation by putting bogus voting results
and forged validator signatures in its mined block. As a re-
sult, avoiding choosing the block mined by a malicious d is
essential for robust blockchained FL.
To fulﬁll this purpose, inspired by the reward mechanism
in BlockFL (Kim et al. 2019) and consolidated by the role
switching policy, VBFL-PoS rewards devices according to
the roles they play. Let r denote a unit reward.
1. Worker rewards: A worker w in Rj is rewarded propor-
tionally to the number of data samples in trainw and the
number of local training epochs in Rj, denoted as lew
j , if
the number of Positive votes for Lw
j , denoted as N+(Lw
j ),
is greater than or equal to the number of Negative votes
for Lw
j , denoted as N−(Lw
j ), from V in Rj. The total re-
wards of worker w in Rj is calculated as:
rw
j =
lew
j ∗|trainw| ∗r
if N+(Lw
j ) ≥N−(Lw
j )
0
if N+(Lw
j ) < N−(Lw
j )
(1)
2. Validator rewards: A validator v in Rj is rewarded for ver-
ifying the signatures of the received worker-transactions
{txw
j } and voting for {Lw
j } extracted from the signature-
veriﬁed {txw
j }, namely, for generating {vtv(Lw
j )}. The
total rewards of d being validator v in Rj is calculated as:
rv
j = |{rv-veri
j
}| + |{rv-vali
j
}|
= |{txw
j }| ∗r + |{vtv(Lw
j )}| ∗r
(2)
Note that |{txw
j }| is not necessarily equal to |{vtv(Lw
j )}|.
If the signature of a txw
j is not veriﬁed, v will not perform
voting for the Lw
j encapsulated in this non-veriﬁed txw
j .
3. Miner rewards: A miner m in Rj is rewarded for ver-
ifying the signatures of received validator-transactions
{txv
j(Lw
j )}, calculated as
rm
j = |{rm-veri
j
}| = |{txv
j(Lw
j )}| ∗r
(3)
VBFL-PoS Miner Selection
VBFL-PoS rewards worker w with lew
j and |trainw|, if Lw
j
is positively voted, as a way to incentivize devices to con-
tribute a large number of high-quality data samples and le-
gitimately perform as many epochs as possible. As a result,
the more rewards a device receives as a worker in Rj, the
more positive contribution it has made to the training pro-
cess in Rj. Workers are more heavily rewarded than valida-
tors and miners, as the veriﬁcation and validation processes
by validators and miners are regarded as obligation to keep
VBFL-PoS running. Therefore, the accumulated stake of a
device clearly shows the total contribution it has made to
the entire learning process as the communication round pro-
gresses. When it comes to selecting the block for the global
model update, VBFL-PoS dictates selecting the block mined
by the miner possessing the highest stake among M, as the

Figure 5: Effectiveness of Validation Mechanism
miner with the highest stake has made the most contribu-
tions to the learning process among M, and therefore it is
regarded as the most trustworthy and the least probable to
obstruct the learning process. The block selected by VBFL-
PoS is called the legitimate block and denoted as blockj in
Rj. The miner producing blockj is called the winning-miner
in Rj.
In the current implementation, there may be rounds where
M consists of all malicious devices, or a malicious device
is selected as the wining-miner because it possesses more
stake than other legitimate miners in M. The role-switching
policy ensures miners to be re-selected in each new round,
which reduces the chance where a malicious device is con-
secutively assigned to a miner role. Role-switching also pre-
vents the “nondemocracy side effect” (Qu et al. 2019), by
which the device with the highest stake can be selected as
the winning-miner continuously. The prevention of such an
effect can mitigate the risk that this device is compromised
at a future point and start to attack the learning process. In
cooperation with the blacklisting rule, the block mined by a
blacklisted miner will get rejected by its associated devices,
preventing VBFL-PoS from selecting that block as the legit-
imate block. We validated the effectiveness of miner selec-
tion under VBFL-PoS in the next section.
Experimental Results
All the experiments were conducted on a virtual machine
with one NVIDIA V100 GPU, two Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPUs

involved 20 devices for both Vanilla FL and VBFL, and
their training sets were assigned with a randomly sharded
equally-sized portion of the entire MNIST training set with-
out overlap. KickR was set to 6 and unit reward r was set
to 1 in all VBFL experiments. The veriﬁcation of signa-
tures is outside the scope of this work, so that all signatures
were assumed to be veriﬁed. Each device in both Vanilla FL
and VBFL adopted FedAvg and the MNIST CNN(McMahan
et al. 2017) network structure, with 5 local training epochs
per communication round, learning rate 0.01, and batch size
10.
With the above basic conﬁguration, we name the follow-
ing experimental setups speciﬁcally:
1. VFL 0/20: Vanilla FL with all 20 legitimate learning de-
vices
2. VFL 3/20: Vanilla FL with malicious ratio 3/20 (i.e., 3 out
of 20 devices are malicious)
3. VBFL PoS 0/20 vh1.00: VBFL-PoS with all 20 legiti-
mate devices and ﬁxed validator-threshold 1.0
4. VBFL PoS 3/20 vh0.08: VBFL-PoS with malicious ratio
3/20 and ﬁxed validator-threshold 0.08
5. VBFL PoW 3/20 vh0.08: VBFL-PoW with malicious ra-
tio 3/20 and ﬁxed validator-threshold 0.08
Other speciﬁc experimental setups will be elaborated case
by case.
Effectiveness of VBFL’s Validation Mechanism
The effectiveness of the proposed validation mechanism can
be visualized in Fig. 5. We ran 3 executions over 100 com-
munication rounds for each of the 5 experiments labeled in
the ﬁgure and recorded the global model accuracy at the end
of each round produced by all the 20 devices. We manu-
ally assigned an arbitrary combination of 12 w’s, 5 v’s and
3 m’s for all three VBFL executions across all 100 rounds.
For both Vanilla FL and VBFL, as each device used the en-
tire MNIST test set and the global model was consistent over
devices at the end of each communication round, the evalu-
ated accuracy at every round was the same from each device
as shown in Fig. 5. The solid curves show the average accu-
racy values at each round of the 3 executions, and the upper
bounds of the shaded areas depict the means plus the stan-
dard deviations of the 3 accuracy values at each round, and
the lower bounds depict the means minus the standard devi-
ations.
• FL without malicious devices: The orange curve area
show the accuracy of VFL 0/20, and the green curve area
show that of VBFL PoS 0/20 vh1.00. When all v ∈V
chose validator-threshold 1.0, they would vote Positive for
every available local model update, meaning every avail-
able local model update would be used to calculate the
global model. As both experimental setups did not involve
any malicious device, the green curve area is observed to
be almost overlapped with the orange curve area, indicat-
ing the FL part of VBFL functioned correctly. Given the
same number of total devices, although there were fewer
learning devices (i.e., the workers) in VBFL compared to
Vanilla FL (12 vs 20), its accuracy was not sacriﬁced be-
cause the role-switching policy ensures that every trainw
has a chance to be learned.
• Effectiveness of Model Validation: The red curve area
show the accuracy of VFL 3/20, and the blue curve area
show that of VBFL PoS 3/20 vh0.08. To focus solely
on the effectiveness of model validation, there was no
malicious behavior performed when malicious devices
were selected as either validator or miner. Compared to
VFL 3/20, the Validation Mechanism shown by the blue
curve area effectively discards the distorted local model
updates from at most 3 malicious devices and has the
overall accuracy approaching that of the orange and the
green curves. However, there is a roughly 10% gap af-
ter convergence between the orange/green curves and the
blue curve. This is attributed to the fact that up to 15% of

Figure 6: Stake Accumulation Curve
Figure 7: Effectiveness of VBFL-PoS Miner Selection
the MNIST training data owned by the 3 malicious devices
was never adequately learned.
• Effectiveness of Decentralized Voting: In the setup of
VBFL PoS 3/20 vh0.08 mv, when a malicious device be-
came a validator, this device would always ﬂip its voting
result after it executed Algorithm 1 for a local model up-
date, and this is the only implementation difference com-
pared to VBFL PoS 3/20 vh0.08. The accuracy with mali-
cious validators is shown by the brown curve area, which
almost overlaps with the blue curve area, indicating that
a few malicious or compromised validators in each round
would not disrupt the validation process as a whole.
VBFL-PoS vs. PoW Consensus in Miner Selection
As the miner selection mechanism in PoW is indifferent to
the stakeholding of miners, we can evaluate the effectiveness
of legitimate miner selection in VBFL-PoS by comparing
the maliciousness of the selected winning-miners in PoW
and VBFL-PoS. To implement PoW-based VBFL (termed
VBFL-PoW), we added the PoW-mining operation for min-
ers, which is doing nonce increments to meet the speciﬁed
PoW-difﬁculty. Also, whenever a miner successfully ﬁnds
the nonce of its candidate block, it would append this block
to its blockchain, propagate this block to other miners and
require its associated devices to download this block; when
a miner receives a propagated block with a valid signature,
the miner would stop mining its own block, append the re-
ceived block to its blockchain, and require its associated de-
vices to download this propagated block. For VBFL-PoS, we
set the propagated-block-wait-time to unlimited so that each
miner was able to ﬁnish mining its own block and receive the
propagated blocks from all the other miners, and decide the
legitimate block immediately after it had received the last
propagated block.
In
addition
to
the
three
VBFL-PoS
executions
in
the
last
subsection,
we
ran
one
experiment
of
VBFL PoW 3/20 vh0.08 with PoW-difﬁculty 1 and an-
other VBFL PoW 3/20 vh0.08 with PoW-difﬁculty 2. We
plotted Fig. 7 for each consensus setup, in which a circle
indicates an event that a malicious device was selected as
the winning-miner during that communication round. For
the three VBFL-PoS experiments, no malicious device was
selected as the winning-miner in any round, while there
were six rounds in PoW-difﬁculty 1 and ten rounds in
PoW-difﬁculty 2, in which the legitimate block was mined
by a malicious device. We also plotted the corresponding
stake cumulation curves of all 20 devices in Fig. 6. It is
observed that the stake possessed by malicious devices
increases very slowly and stopped increasing in an early
stage in all ﬁve setups due to the validation mechanism. As
a result, a malicious device was less likely chosen as the
winning-miner in VBFL-PoS, which explains the results
of miner selection of the three VBFL-PoS experiments
in Fig. 7. However, PoW did not take advantage of the
stakeholding of the miners but the mining speeds, to decide
the legitimate block, making it possible for a malicious
device to be selected as the winning-miner in any round,
unless it is blacklisted by its associated devices.
Conclusion and Future Work
In this article, we have proposed VBFL, a blockchained FL
framework that is robust against malicious distortions of
local model updates. To mostly promote federation within
only legitimate devices while excluding malicious devices,
VBFL uses a decentralized validation mechanism to val-
idate local model updates and a communication-efﬁcient,
FL-dedicated PoS consensus mechanism to select the block
mined by the miner that has made the primary contribution
to the learning process for extracting the positively voted
local model updates to construct the global model. In our
open-source prototype of VBFL, we have implemented var-
ious blockchain functionalities, such as peer registration,
chain resyncing, the simulation of a forking event that are
not effectively shown in this preliminary work. Utilizing
such features, testing advanced adversarial attacks other than
model distortions, and improving the blockchain mecha-
nisms could be interesting for future research. In addition,
noticing that PoS signiﬁcantly reduces blockchain comput-
ing latency and energy consumption compared to PoW, it
is worth studying to integrate VBFL with more communi-
cation and energy-efﬁcient distributed learning frameworks
than FedAvg considered in this work. Lastly, the VBFL
framework presented in this work operates in its emulation
mode, and a more efﬁcient blockchain data structure, chain-
resyncing algorithm, and fault tolerance mechanisms have to
be developed to test the performance of VBFL in practical
distributed systems.
