Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
CONVOLUTIONAL
NEURAL
NETWORKS
ON
NON-
UNIFORM GEOMETRICAL SIGNALS USING EUCLIDEAN
SPECTRAL TRANSFORMATION
Chiyu “Max” Jiang
UC Berkeley
Dequan Wang
UC Berkeley
Jingwei Huang
Stanford University
Philip Marcus
UC Berkeley
Matthias Nießner
Technical University of Munich
ABSTRACT
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) have been successful in processing data
signals that are uniformly sampled in the spatial domain (e.g., images). However,
most data signals do not natively exist on a grid, and in the process of being sampled
onto a uniform physical grid suffer signiﬁcant aliasing error and information loss.
Moreover, signals can exist in different topological structures as, for example,
points, lines, surfaces and volumes. It has been challenging to analyze signals with
mixed topologies (for example, point cloud with surface mesh). To this end, we
develop mathematical formulations for Non-Uniform Fourier Transforms (NUFT)
to directly, and optimally, sample nonuniform data signals of different topologies
deﬁned on a simplex mesh into the spectral domain with no spatial sampling
error. The spectral transform is performed in the Euclidean space, which removes
the translation ambiguity from works on the graph spectrum. Our representation
has four distinct advantages: (1) the process causes no spatial sampling error
during the initial sampling, (2) the generality of this approach provides a uniﬁed
framework for using CNNs to analyze signals of mixed topologies, (3) it allows
us to leverage state-of-the-art backbone CNN architectures for effective learning
without having to design a particular architecture for a particular data structure in
an ad-hoc fashion, and (4) the representation allows weighted meshes where each
element has a different weight (i.e., texture) indicating local properties. We achieve
results on par with the state-of-the-art for the 3D shape retrieval task, and a new
state-of-the-art for the point cloud to surface reconstruction task.
1
INTRODUCTION
We present a unifying and novel geometry representation for utilizing Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) on geometries represented on weighted simplex meshes (including textured point clouds, line
meshes, polygonal meshes, and tetrahedral meshes) which preserve maximal shape information based
on the Fourier transformation. Most methods that leverage CNNs for shape learning preprocess these
shapes into uniform-grid based 2D images (rendered multiview images) or 3D images (binary voxel
or Signed Distance Function (SDF)). However, rendered 2D images do not preserve the 3D topologies
of the original shapes due to occlusions and the loss of the third spatial dimension. Binary voxels
and SDF representations under low resolution suffer big aliasing errors and under high resolution
become memory inefﬁcient. Loss of information in the input bottlenecks the effectiveness of the
downstream learning process. Moreover, it is not clear how a weighted mesh where each element is
weighted by a different scalar or vector (i.e., texture) can be represented by binary voxels and SDF.
Mesh and graph based CNNs perform learning on the manifold physical space or graph spectrum, but
generality across topologies remains challenging.
In contrast to methods that operate on uniform sampling based representations such as voxel-based and
view-based models, which suffer signiﬁcant representational errors, we use analytical integration to
precisely sample in the spectral domain to avoid sample aliasing errors. Unlike graph spectrum based
1
arXiv:1901.02070v1  [cs.CV]  7 Jan 2019

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Figure 1: Top: Schematic of the NUFT transformations of the Stanford Bunny model. Bottom:
Schematic for shape retrieval and surface reconstruction experiments.
methods, our method naturally generalize across input data structures of varied topologies. Using our
representation, CNNs can be directly applied in the corresponding physical domain obtainable by
inverse Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) due to the equivalence of the spectral and physical domains.
This allows for the use of powerful uniform Cartesian grid based CNN backbone architectures (such as
DLA (Yu et al., 2018), ResNet (He et al., 2016)) for the learning task on arbitrary geometrical signals.
Although the signal is deﬁned on a simplex mesh, it is treated as a signal in the Euclidean space
instead of on a graph, differentiating our framework from graph-based spectral learning techniques
which have signiﬁcant difﬁculties generalizing across topologies and unable to utilize state-of-the-art
Cartesian CNNs.
We evaluate the effectiveness of our shape representation for deep learning tasks with three experi-
ments: a controlled MNIST toy example, the 3D shape retrieval task, and a more challenging 3D
point cloud to surface reconstruction task. In a series of evaluations on different tasks, we show the
unique advantages of this representation, and good potential for its application in a wider range of
shape learning problems. We achieve state-of-the-art performance among non-pre-trained models for
the shape retrieval task, and beat state-of-the-art models for the surface reconstruction task.
The key contributions of our work are as follows:
• We develop mathematical formulations for performing Fourier Transforms of signals deﬁned
on a simplex mesh, which generalizes and extends to all geometries in all dimensions. (Sec.
3)
• We analytically show that our approach computes the frequency domain representation
precisely, leading to much lower overall representational errors. (Sec. 3)
• We empirically show that our representation preserves maximal shape information compared
to commonly used binary voxel and SDF representations. (Sec. 4.1)
• We show that deep learning models using CNNs in conjunction with our shape representation
achieves state-of-the-art performance across a range of shape-learning tasks including shape
retrieval (Sec. 4.2) and point to surface reconstruction (Sec. 4.3)
2

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
0
1
0
0
(a)
−.2
.3
.1
−.6
(b)
?
?
?
?
(c)
Figure 2:
Surface localization in (a) binary
pixel/voxel representation, where the boundary can
only be in one of 24 (2D) or 28 (3D) discrete lo-
cations (b) Signed Distance Function representa-
tion, where boundary is linear (c) proposed repre-
sentation, with nonlinear localization of boundary,
achieving subgrid accuracy
Notation
Description
d
Dimension of Euclidean space Rd
j
Degree of simplex. Point j = 0,
Line j = 1, Tri. j = 2, Tet. j = 3
n, N
Index of the n-th element among a
total of N elements
Ωj
n
Domain of n-th element of order j
x
Cartesian space coordinate vector.
x = (x, y, z)
k
Spectral domain coordinate vector.
k = (u, v, w)
i
Imaginary number unit
Table 1: Notation list
2
RELATED WORK
2.1
SHAPE REPRESENTATION
Shape learning involves the learning of a mapping from input geometrical signals to desired output
quantities. The representation of geometrical signals is key to the learning process, since on the one
hand the representation determines the learning architectures, and, on the other hand, the richness of
information preserved by the representation acts as a bottleneck to the downstream learning process.
While data representation has not been an open issue for 2D image learning, it is far from being
agreed upon in the existing literature for 3D shape learning. The varied shape representations used in
3D machine learning are generally classiﬁed as multiview images (Su et al., 2015a; Shi et al., 2015;
Kar et al., 2017), volumetric voxels (Wu et al., 2015; Maturana & Scherer, 2015; Wu et al., 2016;
Brock et al., 2016), point clouds (Qi et al., 2017a;b; Wang et al., 2018b), polygonal meshes (Kato
et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018a; Monti et al., 2017; Maron et al., 2017), shape primitives (Zou et al.,
2017; Li et al., 2017), and hybrid representations (Dai & Nießner, 2018).
Our proposed representation is closest to volumetric voxel representation, since the inverse Fourier
Transform of the spectral signal in physical domain is a uniform grid implicit representation of
the shape. However, binary voxel representation suffers from signiﬁcant aliasing errors during the
uniform sampling step in the Cartesian space (Pantaleoni, 2011). Using boolean values for de facto
ﬂoating point numbers during CNN training is a waste of information processing power. Also, the
primitive-in-cell test for binarization requires arbitrary grouping in cases such as having multiple
points or planes in the same cell (Thrun, 2003). Signed Distance Function (SDF) or Truncated
Signed Distance Function (TSDF) (Liu et al., 2017; Canelhas, 2017) provides localization for the
shape boundary, but is still constrained to linear surface localization due to the linear interpolation
process for recovering surfaces from grids. Our proposed representation under Fourier basis can ﬁnd
nonlinear surface boundaries, achieving subgrid-scale accuracy (See Figure 2).
2.2
LEARNING ARCHITECTURES
Cartesian CNNs are the most ubiquitous and mature type of learning architecture in Computer Vision.
It has been thoroughly studied in a range of problems, including image recognition (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014; He et al., 2016), object detection (Girshick, 2015; Ren
et al., 2015), and image segmentation (Long et al., 2015; He et al., 2017). In the spirit of 2D
image-based deep learning, Cartesian CNNs have been widely used in shape learning models that
adopted multiview shape representation (Su et al., 2015a; Shi et al., 2015; Kar et al., 2017; Su et al.,
2015b; Pavlakos et al., 2017; Tulsiani et al., 2018). Also, due to its straightforward and analogous
extension to 3D by swapping 2D convolutional kernels with 3D counterparts, Cartesian CNNs have
also been widely adopted in shape learning models using volumetric representations (Wu et al., 2015;
Maturana & Scherer, 2015; Wu et al., 2016; Brock et al., 2016). However, the dense nature of the
operations makes it inefﬁcient for sparse 3D shape signals. To this end, improvements to Cartesian
3

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
CNNs have been made using space partitioning tree structures, such as Quadtree in 2D and Octree
in 3D (Wang et al., 2017; Häne et al., 2017; Tatarchenko et al., 2017). These Cartesian CNNs can
leverage backbone CNN architectures being developed in related computer vision problems and
thus achieve good performance. Since the physical domain representation in this study is based on
Cartesian uniform grids, we directly use Cartesian CNNs.
Graph CNNs utilize input graph structure for performing graph convolutions. They have been
developed to engage with general graph structured data (Bruna et al., 2013; Henaff et al., 2015;
Defferrard et al., 2016). Yi et al. (2017) used spectral CNNs with the eigenfunctions of the graph
Laplacian as a basis. However, the generality of this approach across topologies and geometris is still
challenging since consistency in eigenfunction basis is implied.
Specially Designed Neural Networks have been used to perform learning on unconventional data
structures. For example, Qi et al. (2017a) designed a Neural Network architecture for points that
achieves invariances using global pooling, with follow-up work (Qi et al., 2017b) using CNNs-
inspired hiearchical structures for more efﬁcient learning. Masci et al. (2015) performed convolution
directly on the shape manifold and Cohen et al. (2017) designed CNNs for the spherical domain and
used it for 3D shapes by projecting the shapes onto the bounding sphere.
2.3
FOURIER TRANSFORM OF SHAPE FUNCTIONS
The original work on analytical expressions for Fourier transforms of 2D polygonal shape functions
is given by Lee & Mittra (1983). Improved and simpler calculation methods have been suggested
in Chu & Huang (1989). A 3D formulation is proposed by Zhang & Chen (2001). Theoretical
analyses have been performed for the Fourier analysis of simplex domains (Sun, 2006; Li & Xu,
2009) and Sammis & Strain (2009) designed approximation methods for Fast Fourier Transform of
polynomial functions deﬁned on simplices. Prisacariu & Reid (2011) describe shape with elliptic
Fourier descriptors for level set-based segmentation and tracking. There has also been a substantial
literature on fast non-uniform Fourier transform methods for discretely sampled signal (Greengard &
Lee, 2004). However we are the ﬁrst to provide a simple general expression for a j-simplex mesh,
an algorithm to perform the transformation, and illustrations of their applicability to deep learning
problems.
3
REPRESENTATION OF SHAPE FUNCTIONS
3.1
MATHEMATICAL PRELIMINARIES
Almost all discrete geometric signals can be abstracted into weighted simplicial complexes. A
simplicial complex is a set composed of points, line segments, triangles, and their d-dimensional
counterparts. We call a simplicial complex consisting solely of j-simplices as a homogeneous
simplicial j-complex, or a j-simplex mesh. Most popular geometric representations that the research
community is familiar with are simplex meshes. For example, the point cloud is a 0-simplex mesh, the
triangular mesh is a 2-simplex mesh, and the tetrahedral mesh is a 3-simplex mesh. A j-simplex mesh
consists of a set of individual elements, each being a j-simplex. If signal is non-uniformly distributed
over the simplex, we can deﬁne a piecewise constant j-simplex function over the j-simplex mesh.
We call this a weighted simplex mesh. Each element has a distinct signal density.
J-simplex function For the n-th j-simplex with domain Ωj
n, we deﬁne a density function f j
n(x). For
example, for some Computer Vision and Graphics applications, a three-component density value can
be deﬁned on each element of a triangular mesh for its RGB color content. For scientiﬁc applications,
signal density can be viewed as mass or charge or other physical quantity.
f j
n(x) =
ρn, x ∈Ωj
n
0, x /∈Ωj
n
,
f j(x) =
N
X
n=1
f j
n(x)
(1)
The piecewise-constant j-simplex function consisting of N simplices is therefore deﬁned as the
superposition of the element-wise simplex function. Using the linearity of the integral in the Fourier
transform, we can decompose the Fourier transform of the density function on the j-simplex mesh to
4

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
be a weighted sum of the Fourier transform on individual j-simplices.
F j(k) =
Z
· · ·
Z ∞
−∞
f j(x)e−ik·xdx =
N
X
n=1
ρn
Z
· · ·
Z
Ωj
n
e−ik·xdx
|
{z
}
:=F j
n(k)
=
N
X
n=1
ρnF j
n(k)
(2)
3.2
SIMPLEX MESH FOURIER TRANSFORM
We present a general formula for performing the Fourier transform of signal over a single j-simplex.
We provide detailed derivation and proof for j = 0, 1, 2, 3 in the supplemental material.
F j
n(k) = ijγj
n
j+1
X
t=1
e−iσt
Qj+1
l=1,l̸=t(σt −σl)
,
σt := k · xt
(3)
We deﬁne γj
n to be the content distortion factor, which is the ratio of content between the simplex
over the domain Ωj
n and the unit orthogonal j-simplex. Content is the j-dimensional analogy of the
3-dimensional volume. The unit orthogonal j-simplex is deﬁned as a j-simplex with one vertex at the
Cartesian origin and all edges adjacent to the origin vertex to be pairwise orthogonal and to have unit
length. Therefore from Equation (2) the ﬁnal general expression for computing the Fourier transform
of a signal deﬁned on a weighted simplex mesh is:
F j(k) =
N
X
n
ρnijγj
n
j+1
X
t=1
e−iσt
Qj+1
l=1,l̸=t(σt −σl)
(4)
For computing the simplex content, we use the Cayley-Menger Determinant for a general expression:
Cj
n =
s
(−1)j+1
2j(j!)2 det( ˆBj
n),
where ˆBj
n =


0
1
1
1
· · ·
1
0
d2
12
d2
13
· · ·
1
d2
21
0
d2
23
· · ·
1
d2
31
d2
32
0
· · ·
...
...
...
...


(5)
For the matrix ˆBj
n, each entry d2
mn represents the squared distance between nodes m and n. The
matrix is of size (j + 2) × (j + 2) and is symmetrical. Since the unit orthogonal simplex has content
of Cj
I = 1/j!, the content distortion factor γj
n can be calculated by:
γj
n = Cj
n
Cj
I
= j!Cj
n = j!
s
(−1)j+1
2j(j!)2 det( ˆBj
n)
(6)
Auxiliary Node Method: Equation (3) provides a mean of computing the Fourier transform of a
simplex with uniform signal density. However, how do we compute the Fourier transform of polytopes
(i.e., polygons in 2D, polyhedra in 3D) with uniform signal density efﬁciently? Here, we introduce the
auxiliary node method (AuxNode) that utilizes signed content for efﬁcient computing. We show that
for a solid j-polytope represented by a watertight (j −1)-simplex mesh, we can compute the Fourier
transform of the entire polytope by traversing each of the elements in its boundary (j −1)-simplex
mesh exactly once (Zhang & Chen, 2001).
The auxiliary node method performs Fourier transform over the the signed content bounded by an
auxilliary node (a convenient choice being the origin of the Cartesian coordinate system) and each
(j −1)-simplex on the boundary mesh. This forms an auxiliary j-simplex: Ωj
n′, n′ ∈[0, N ′], where
N ′ is the number of (j −1)-simplices in the boundary mesh. However due to the overlapping
of these auxiliary j-simplices, we need a means of computing the sign of the transform for the
overlapping regions to cancel out. Equation (3) provides a general expression for computing the
unsigned transform for a single j-simplex. It is trivial to show that since the ordering of the nodes
does not affect the determinant in Equation (5), it gives the unsigned content value.
Therefore, to compute the Fourier transform of uniform signals in j-polytopes represented by its
watertight (j −1)-simplex mesh using the auxiliary node method, we modify Equation (3):
F j
n(k) = ij
N′
n
X
n′=1
sn′γj
n′
 (−1)j
Qj
l=1 σl
+
j
X
t=1
e−iσt
σt
Qj
l=1,l̸=t(σt −σl)

(7)
5

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
(a) Experiment setup
4
8
12
16
4
8
12
16
4
8
12
16
4
8
12
16
20
24
28
20
24
28
20
24
28
20
24
28
0.991
0.992
0.993
0.994
0.995
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Resolution
Accuracy
Raw
NUFT
Binary Pixel
Distance Function
(b) MNIST
Figure 3: MNIST experiment. (a) schematic for experiment setup. The original MNIST pixel image
is up-sampled using interpolation and contoured to get a polygonal representation of the digit. For
the polygon, it is transformed into binary pixels, distance functions, and the NUFT physical domain.
(b) classiﬁcation accuracy versus input resolution under various representation schemes. NUFT
representation is more optimal, irrespective of resolution.
sn′γj
n′ is the signed content distortion factor for the n′th auxiliary j-simplex where sn′ ∈{−1, 1}.
For practical purposes, assume that the auxiliary j-simplex is in Rd where d = j. We can compute
the signed content distortion factor using the determinant of the Jacobian matrix for parameterizing
the auxiliary simplex to a unit orthogonal simplex:
sn′γj
n′ = j! det(J) = j! det([x1, x2, · · · , xj])
(8)
Since this method requires the boundary simplices to be oriented, the right-hand rule can be used to
infer the correct orientation of the boundary element. For 2D polygons, it requires that the watertight
boundary line mesh be oriented in a counter-clockwise fashion. For 3D polytopes, it requires that the
face normals of boundary triangles resulting from the right-hand rule be consistently outward-facing.
Algorithmic implementation: Several efﬁciencies can be exploited to achieve fast runtime and high
robustness. First, since the general expression Equation (4) involves division and is vulnerable to
division-by-zero errors (that is not a singularity since it can be eliminated by taking the limit), add a
minor random noise ϵ to vertex coordinates as well as to the k = 0 frequency mode for robustness.
Second, to avoid repeated computation, the value should be cached in memory and reused, but caching
all σ and e−iσ values for all nodes and frequencies is infeasible for large mesh and/or high resolution
output, thus the Breadth-First-Search (BFS) algorithm should be used to traverse the vertices for
efﬁcient memory management.
4
EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we will discuss the experiment setup, and we defer the details of our model architecture
and training process to the supplementary material since it is not the focus of this paper.
4.1
MNIST WITH POLYGONS
We use the MNIST experiment as a ﬁrst example to show that shape information in the input
signiﬁcantly affects the efﬁcacy of the downstream learning process. Since the scope of this research
is on efﬁciently learning from nonuniform mesh-based representations, we compare our method with
the state of the art in a slightly different scenario by treating MNIST characters as polygons. We
6

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
NUFT Volume
NUFT Surface
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
F1
mAP
NDCG
F1
mAP
NDCG
Accuracy
Resolution
128
96
64
Figure 4: Comparison between NUFT Volume
and NUFT Surface performance at different reso-
lutions.
Rep
Method
F1
mAP
NDCG
No Pre-training
Volu-
metric
Ours(NUFT-V) 0.770
0.745
0.809
DeepVoxNet 0.253
0.192
0.277
With Pre-training
Multi-
View
RotationNet
0.798
0.772
0.865
ImprovGIF
0.767
0.722
0.827
ReVGG
0.772
0.749
0.828
MVCNN
0.764
0.735
0.815
Table 2: Comparison of shape retrieval perfor-
mance with state-of-the-art models. The best
result among each representation category is
highlighted in bold.
choose this experiment as a ﬁrst toy example since it is easy to control the learning architecture and
input resolution to highlight the effects of shape representation on deep learning performance.
Experiment setup: We pre-process the original MNIST raw pixel images into polygons, which are
represented by watertight line meshes on their boundaries. The polygonized digits are converted into
(n × n) binary pixel images and into distance functions by uniformly sampling the polygon at the
(n × n) sample locations. For NUFT, we ﬁrst compute the lowest (n × n) Fourier modes for the
polygonal shape function and then use an inverse Fourier transform to acquire the physical domain
image. We also compare the results with the raw pixel image downsampled to different resolutions,
which serves as an oracle for information ceiling. Then we perform the standard MNIST classiﬁcation
experiment on these representations with varying resolution n and with the same network architecture.
Results: The experiment results are presented in Figure (3b). It is evident that binary pixel repre-
sentation suffers the most information loss, especially at low resolutions, which leads to rapidly
declining performance. Using the distance function representation preserves more information, but
underperforms our NUFT representation. Due to its efﬁcient information compression in the Spectral
domain, NUFT even outperforms the downsampled raw pixel image at low resolutions.
4.2
3D SHAPE RETRIEVAL
Shape retrieval is a classic task in 3D shape learning. SHREC17 (Savva et al., 2016) which is based on
the ShapeNet55 Core dataset serves as a compelling benchmark for 3D shape retrieval performance.
We compare the retrieval performance of our model utilizing the NUFT-surface (NUFT-S) and
NUFT-volume (NUFT-V) at various resolutions against state-of-the-art shape retrieval algorithms
to illustrate its potential in a range of 3D learning problems. We performed the experiments on
the normalized dataset in SHREC17. Our model utilizes 3D DLA (Yu et al., 2018) as a backbone
architecture.
Results: Results from the experiment are tabulated in Table 2. For the shape retrieval task, most
state-of-the-art methods are based on multi-view representation that utilize a 2D CNN pretrained on
additional 2D datasets such as ImageNet. We have achieved results on par with, though not better
than, state-of-the-art pretrained 2D models. We outperform other models in this benchmark that
have not been pre-trained on additional data. We also compared NUFT-volume and NUFT-surface
representations in Figure 4. Interestingly NUFT-volume and NUFT-surface representations lead to
similar performances under the same resolution.
7

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Figure 5: Zoom-in comparison.
Method
Chamfer Accuracy Complete
DMC
0.218
0.182
0.254
PSR-5
0.352
0.405
0.298
PSR-8
0.198
0.196
0.200
Ours(w/ Noise) 0.144
0.150
0.137
Ours(w/o Noise) 0.145
0.125
0.165
Table 3: Quantitative comparison of surface
reconstruction methods. The metrics above are
distances, hence lower value represents better
performance. Best result is highlighted in bold.
We achieve better results than the current state-
of-the-art method by a sizable margin, and our
results are robust to noise in the input.
Figure 6: Qualitative side-by-side comparison of
surface reconstruction results.
4.3
3D SURFACE RECONSTRUCTION FROM POINT CLOUDS
We further illustrate the advantages of our representation with a unique yet important task in compu-
tational geometry that has been challenging to address with conventional deep learning techniques:
surface reconstruction from point cloud. The task is challenging for deep learning in two aspects:
First, it requires input and output signals of different topologies and structures (i.e., input being a
point cloud and output being a surface). Second, it requires precise localization of the signal in 3D
space. Using our NUFT-point representation as input and NUFT-surface representation as output,
we can frame the task as a 3D image-to-image translation problem, which is easy to address using
analogous 2D techniques in 3D. We use the U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015) architecture and train it
with a single L2 loss between output and ground truth NUFT-surface representation.
Experiment Setup: We train and test our model using shapes from three categories of ShapeNet55
Core dataset (car, sofa, bottle). We trained our model individually for these three categories. As a
pre-processing step we removed faces not visible from the exterior and simpliﬁed the mesh for faster
conversion to NUFT representation. For the input point cloud, we performed uniform point sampling
of 3000 points from each mesh and converted the points into the NUFT-point representation (1283).
Then, we converted the triangular mesh into NUFT-surface representation (1283). At test time, we
post-process the output NUFT-surface implicit function by using the marching cubes algorithm to
extract 0.5 contours. Since the extracted mesh has thickness, we further shrink the mesh by moving
vertices to positions with higher density values while preserving the rigidity of each face. Last but
not least, we qualitatively and quantitatively compare the performance by showing the reconstructed
mesh against results from the traditional Poisson Surface Reconstruction (PSR) method (Kazhdan
& Hoppe, 2013) at various tree depths (5 and 8) and the Deep Marching Cubes (DMC) algorithm
(Liao et al., 2018). For quantitative comparison, we follow the literature (Seitz et al., 2006) and use
Chamfer distance, Accuracy and Completeness as the metrics for comparison. For comparison with
Liao et al. (2018), we also test the model with noisy inputs (Gaussian of sigma 0.15 voxel-length
under 32 resolution), computed distance metrics after normalizing the models to the range of (0, 32).
Results: Refer to Table 3 for quantitative comparisons with competing algorithms on the same
task, and Figures 5 and 6 for visual comparisons. GT stands for Ground Truth. We achieve new
state-of-the-art in the point to surface reconstruction task, due to the good localization properties of
the NUFT representations and its ﬂexibility across geometry topologies.
8

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
5
CONCLUSION
We present a general representation for multidimensional signals deﬁned on simplicial complexes
that is versatile across geometrical deep learning tasks and maximizes the preservation of shape
information. We develop a set of mathematical formulations and algorithmic tools to perform
the transformations efﬁciently. Last but not least, we illustrate the effectiveness of the NUFT
representation with a well-controlled example (MNIST polygon), a classic 3D task (shape retrieval)
and a difﬁcult and mostly unexplored task by deep learning (point to surface reconstruction), achieving
new state-of-the-art performance in the last task. In conclusion, we offer an alternative representation
for performing CNN based learning on geometrical signals that shows great potential in various 3D
tasks, especially tasks involving mixed-topology signals.
