The Abzooba Smart Health Informatics Platform (SHIP) TM – From Patient 
Experiences to Big Data to Insights 
Naveen Ashish, PhD, Abzooba Inc., USA 
Antarip Biswas, MS, Abzooba Inc., and Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, India 
Sumit Das, MS, Abzooba Inc., India 
Saurav Nag, BS, Abzooba Inc., India 
Rajiv Pratap, BTech, Abzooba Inc., USA 
 
Abstract 
This paper describes a technology to connect patients 
to information in the experiences of other patients by 
using the power of structured big data. The 
approach, implemented in the Abzooba Smart Health 
Informatics Platform (SHIP),is to distill concepts of 
facts and expressions from conversations and 
discussions in health social media forums, and use 
those distilled concepts in connecting patients to 
experiences and insights that are highly relevant to 
them in particular. We envision our work, in 
progress, to provide new and effective tools to exploit 
the richness of content in social media in health for 
outcomes research. 
Keywords: 
Information 
retrieval, 
Patient 
experiences, Outcomes research. 
Introduction 
In this paper we describe a platform that we have 
developed for automatically structuring discussions 
in health social media forums, with the objective of 
using the structured information to provide better 
retrieval and analytic insights to end users. With the 
increasing use of the Internet as a resource for health 
information, particularly in social media in health, we 
are witnessing a very high proliferation of user 
(patient) discussions on health issues. According to 
the Pew Internet Project report[1] 78% of Internet 
users (or 59% of US adults)  look up health 
information online, and about one in five of health 
information seekers use social media. The resources 
range from purely patient driven discussion forums to 
question-answer forums with patient as well as 
qualified medical practitioner participation. 
 
 
Figure 1- Insights from Patient Experiences 
Our goal is to provide valuable and effective means 
to connect patients to the experiences of other 
patients like them using the power of big data 
distilled from the original information. Figure 
1illustrates a subsection (for brevity) of information 
provided to a patient in response to a search for 
“Tarceva”(the chemotherapy drug). The ‘Broad 
Categorization’ panel provides information such as 
which forums are most actively discussing Tarceva. 
The ‘Frequent Findings’ panel highlights insights 
such as coughing, joint pain and nausea being the 
most frequently mentioned side-effects in the 
discussions related to Tarceva. The patient can 
further (not shown) click on the links and go to such 

experiences collected from various forums and read 
them. The analytic capabilities above also open up 
new possibilities of insights for clinical outcomes 
research. Indeed, the patient initiated observational 
study on lithium carbonate use in ALS patients [2] 
refuting a 2008 published study on the subject, 
demonstrates the value that information in social 
media on patient experiences can bring to outcomes 
research.  
 
This paper primarily describes the Abzooba Smart 
Health Informatics Platform or SHIP – which has a 
distillation pipeline for automatically distilling 
structured facts and expressions from the experiences 
of patients. The structured facts and expressions go 
into an experiences meta-base (Fig 2), on top of 
which powerful retrieval capabilities can be provided. 
Methods 
Distillation Pipeline 
Figure 2 - Distillation Pipeline 
 
At the heart of the SHIP is a distillation pipeline 
illustrated in Figure 2, driven by technologies such as 
machine learning, automated natural language 
processing and ontologies [2,3]. Posts of patient 
experiences (for consistency we will refer to an entire 
discussion as a ‘Thread’ and individual postings in 
that thread as ‘Post’) go through various extraction 
and classification in the pipeline and finally through 
an aggregation step (explained shortly),by the end of 
which we have distilled about 50 facts and 
expressions from such post. These facts and 
expressions go into a structured big data database or 
what we call our experiences meta-base. The steps 
of the distillation pipeline along with the aggregation 
module to create a structured meta-base of facts and 
expressions from the text in the posts are described: 
Elementary Extraction 
The very first step is to perform some basic text 
processing on each thread and post. This involves 
providing a unique ID to each post and thread, 
parsing using the HTML, and extracting HTML 
based information such as number of replies, when 
last updated etc. 
Entity Extraction 
The next step is to extract medically significant 
entities relevant to health such as drugs (includes 
chemotherapy drugs and regimens, pain medications, 
and other drugs), side-effects, treatments and 
procedures, adverse events, hospitals or locations, 
etc. We have used the XAR system which in turn 
leverages open-source systems (such as “GATE” and 
“UIMA”) [2]. We further built upon XAR by 
integrating in ontologies from theUMLS (Unified 
Medical Language System) [3] and other lexicons 
and ontologies for entities such as side effects and 
pain medications.  
Expression Distillation 
The third step in the concept distillation pipeline is to 
classify each post to one of {Y,N} (yes or no) 
depending on whether the post contains a particular 
expression of interest or not. Specifically we have 
designed and implemented classifiers for five 
expressions of interest: (i) Personal experience i.e., 
whether the post has an expression of someone 
having personally experienced something of interest 
(such as having experienced a particular condition, 
treatment procedure, drug etc.,). (ii) Advice i.e., 
whether there is any advice in the post on something 
of interest. (iii) Information i.e., whether there is any 
informational reference (Websites, books or other 
resources) mentioned in the post. (iv) Support i.e., 
whether the message contains an expression of 
encouragement and/or support (such as “good luck, 
my thoughts and prayers are with you!”). (v) 
Outcome i.e., whether the post is telling about some 
positive or negative outcome after taking some 
medicine or following some medical procedure. All 
the above five classifiers are based on using a “J48” 
decision tree algorithm [4]. The features, provided 
for classifier induction, vary depending on the type of 
classification and are largely based on expression 
phrases and terms in the text. Table 1 shows some 
representative examples of the various facts, entities 
and expressions that are distilled for each post. 
Aggregation 
Finally the elementary facts, extracted entities and 
classified expressions extracted at the post level are 
aggregated at the thread level. Aggregation is the 
process of synthesizing information distilled from 
posts in a thread to the parent thread. For entities, say 
age group or cancer stage, a union is taken of all the 
entities in each post and ascribed to the parent thread. 

On the other hand for a classified expression such as 
advice or personal experience – a presence of such in 
any single post in a thread ascribes the presence to 
the parent thread. 
Table 1 - Distilled Facts and Expressions 
Elementary Facts 
Last updated, Number of responses, Top level category, 
Post length, URL, Expert authored, User name 
Extracted Entities 
Age, Gender, Condition, Cancer stage, Location, Cancer 
condition, Treatment (procedure), General Drug, Chemo 
drugs, Pain killers, Side-effects, Date diagnosed, Hospital 
Classified Expressions 
Personal 
experience, 
Advice, 
Information, 
Support, 
Outcome 
 
Information Retrieval over Experience Meta-base 
As a first step we have developed a Lucene [5] based 
(text) search interface to the information with 
optimizations added for indexing, dynamic score 
boosting and local caching.  
Results  
Evaluation 
We have applied our system to four major discussion 
forums – Inspire1, Medhelp2 and two other forums, 
and on data for six major types of cancer (breast, 
lung, skin, prostate, brain and blood). The base data 
comprises close to 50,000 discussion threads that in 
turn comprise of close to 400,000 discussion posts. 
The resulting experiences meta-base contains over 20 
million facts and expressions distilled from this base 
data. We have further built an initial version of an 
information retrieval engine over this meta-base 
using which we can (i) Provide analytic insights (ii) 
Provide better search through filters. 
As a use case, consider patient experiencing severe 
cough after starting on the chemotherapy drug 
Tarceva. She looks up the Tarceva Web site3 as well 
as a site on a clinical trial related to Tarceva. While 
both these sites talk about the primary side effects of 
Tarceva, cough is not mentioned at all (as a possible 
side effect). A search on “Tarceva” on our site 
however provides the information on the analytic 
dashboard that cough is actually the third most 
common side effect mentioned in the discussions on 
Tarceva ! This indicates to her that her cough may 
actually be due to taking Tarceva, a fact confirmed 
by her perusal of some of the experiences (under 
                                                 
1http://www.inspire.com 
2http://www.medhelp.org 
3http://www.tarceva.com 
“Cough”). She could further filter and hone in on 
discussions that contain some advice on how to deal 
with cough while on Tarceva.  
Distillation Accuracy 
The extraction accuracies, in terms of precision and 
recall, for each of the elementary facts and extracted 
entities are in the range of 0.9 i.e., 90%.  Table 2 
below provides the classified expressions accuracies 
(first letter of classifier for brevity). By design we 
have placed a higher emphasis on precision vs recall 
for challenging cases. 
Table 2 – Classifier Accuracies 
Classifier 
P 
A 
I 
S 
O 
Precision 
0.87 
0.91 
0.93 
0.89 
0.80 
Recall 
0.82 
0.62 
0.91 
0.90 
0.58 
Related Work  
There are several efforts in progress on technologies 
for automated distillation of information from 
(natural language) text data in the medical domain 
[6]. Our work is distinguished from such efforts in 
that (i) We distill expressions such as for personal 
experience, advice and outcome in posts, which is not 
addressed by prior work (ii) We provide selective 
insights over the aggregated data in an automated 
fashion.
