Combination of Hyperband and Bayesian
Optimization for Hyperparameter Optimization
in Deep Learning
Jiazhuo Wang
Blippar

Jason Xu
Blippar

Xuejun Wang
Blippar

Abstract
Deep learning has achieved impressive results on many problems. However, it
requires high degree of expertise or a lot of experience to tune well the hyperpa-
rameters, and such manual tuning process is likely to be biased. Moreover, it is
not practical to try out as many different hyperparameter conﬁgurations in deep
learning as in other machine learning scenarios, because evaluating each single
hyperparameter conﬁguration in deep learning would mean training a deep neural
network, which usually takes quite long time. Hyperband algorithm achieves
state-of-the-art performance on various hyperparameter optimization problems in
the ﬁeld of deep learning. However, Hyperband algorithm does not utilize history
information of previous explored hyperparameter conﬁgurations, thus the solution
found is suboptimal. We propose to combine Hyperband algorithm with Bayesian
optimization (which does not ignore history when sampling next trial conﬁgura-
tion). Experimental results show that our combination approach is superior to other
hyperparameter optimization approaches including Hyperband algorithm.
1
Introduction
We have been witnessing the breakthrough brought by deep learning in various research topics:
Computer vision, natural language processing, and speech recognition; and the signiﬁcant impact
on many industries: Augmented reality, self driving cars, and smart home devices, to name a few.
However, the design of deep neural networks usually requires huge amount of efforts even for
experienced deep learning researchers and practitioners, due to the high complexity involved in nature
with these deep neural networks (for example, some modern deep neural networks may even have
thousands of layers). What makes the adoption and application of a deep learning based solution
even more complex is that (1) all feasible hyperparameter conﬁgurations form a huge space, from
which we need to choose the optimal case, and that (2) evaluating even a single hyperparameter
conﬁguration point in the space is often very time consuming (i.e., training one deep neural network
using modern GPU usually takes hours, days, or even weeks).
Hyperparameters in deep learning can be roughly divided into two types. One type is those associated
with the learning algorithms. For example, suppose one has chosen an off-the-shelf deep neural
network, such as AlexNet, or ResNet, or one has designed a new network speciﬁcally for his or
her own problem; when it comes to training the network, it is usually not clear in advance, for the
training dataset in hand, what learning rate is appropriate, after how many epochs we should decrease
the learning by how much, what value we need to set for weight decay, and so on. Setting these
hyperparameters correctly is often critical for reaching the full potential of the deep neural network
chosen or designed.
The other type of hyperparameters in deep learning is related to how we design the deep neural
networks. For example, some important design questions include: How many layers we need for our
arXiv:1801.01596v1  [cs.CV]  5 Jan 2018

network, how many ﬁlters a given convolutional layer needs, at which layer we downsample the size
of feature maps, and so on. Choosing different values for these hyperparameters would result into
very different network architectures, and consequently would inﬂuence the quality of the produced
results by them.
In the deep learning community, choosing appropriate values for the above two types of hyperparam-
eters is usually accomplished manually, which largely depends on one’s own experience or intuition,
and it may be hard to reproduce results of similar quality when others would like to apply on different
datasets or problems. Moreover, such manual tuning makes it difﬁcult to understand the real ability
of the deep learning model: One may overestimate or underestimate the model if one just happens to
choose a good or bad hyperparameter conﬁguration by chance.
A more systematic approach to tune hyperparameters usually adopted in machine learning community
is grid search. However, when applied to certain hyperparameter optimization problems in deep
learning, it is too time-consuming. For example, suppose one has decided to design a network with
20 convolutional layers, and the hyperparameters are the number of ﬁlters to be assigned to each of
the 20 convolutional layers (i.e., we have 20 hyperparameters). If the number of ﬁlters is restricted in
certain range, e.g., between 10 and 512, then there would be (512 −10)20 = 50220 points in total in
the hyperparameter conﬁguration space; even if grid length is set as 10, there are still ( 502
10 )20 = 5020
points to be evaluated. This would take unacceptable long time: Remember evaluating each single
point means training a network till convergence.
Random search [2] proposes to randomly sample points from the hyperparameter conﬁguration space.
Although this approach looks simple, but it is shown to be able to ﬁnd comparable hyperparameter
conﬁguration to grid search in deep learning, but using only a small fraction of the computation time
used by grid search. Granted with the same computational budget, random search can ﬁnd better
conﬁgurations.
The state-of-the-art Hyperband algorithm [7] makes hyperparameter optimization much more efﬁcient
by observing that it is usually not necessary to allocate computational budget or resources uniformly
to every hyperparameter conﬁguration; a smarter way is to allocate more budget to more promising
hyperparameter conﬁgurations while eliminating the less promising ones quickly. When applied
to deep learning, this algorithm can be viewed as an early-stopping strategy that one often adapts
when tuning hyperparameters for neural networks training: If a learning curve does not look quite
promising or even very poor, one would be more likely to abandon the current hyperparameter
conﬁguration. Further more, it does early-stopping in a more principled way, as would be brieﬂy
reviewed in the Methodology Section.
One major limitation of Hyperband algorithm is that it treats all hyperparameter conﬁguration points
as being independent from each other. But the hyperparameter conﬁguration space is usually smooth,
which means that knowing the quality of certain points in it might help infer the quality of their
nearby points. Therefore, it would be more efﬁcient if we do not sample trial points independently,
but according to what we have known before (i.e., the quality of all previously sampled trial points).
Actually, Bayesian optimization [10, 1, 3] utilizes the above smoothness assumption. When sampling
the next trial point, it balances between exploitation and exploration. Exploitation means it samples
from regions where good quality trial points were found nearby before, and exploration means it also
examines regions that have been rarely visited before. But we notice that unlike Hyperband algorithm,
Bayesian optimization still allocates computational budget uniformly, which causes efﬁciency issues.
To ﬁnd better hyperparameter conﬁgurations as efﬁciently as possible, we propose to combine
Hyperband algorithm and Bayesian optimization. We are motivated by the fact that the two methods
are complementary in nature with each other. After combining them, we are able to fully utilize what
we learned through history of all previous trial points, and at the same time, to focus our attention on
really promising ones and avoid wasting time on less promising ones. In a nutshell, the spirit of our
combination approach is quite straightforward: We simply follow the entire process of Hyperband
algorithm, but one critical difference is that instead of sampling the set of trial points independently,
we sample each of them sequentially (i.e., sampling order matters) according to Bayesian optimization
criterion: Balancing between exploitation and exploration.
Experimental results show that our combination approach outperforms state-of-the-art Hyperband
algorithm, on several deep learning problems and hyperparameter optimization scenarios. The results
2

also indicate that the more difﬁcult the hyperparameter optimization problem is, the larger the margin
is between our approach and other approaches.
2
Methodology
In this section, we present our core algorithm. We ﬁrst brieﬂy review the critical ideas that are helpful
for understanding our combination approach, respectively in Hyperband algorithm and Bayesian
optimization. Then we illustrate in details why and how we combine them together.
2.1
Hyperband
The essential idea of Hyperband is to allocate more resources to more promising hyperparameter
conﬁgurations. First, it initializes a set of n trial points (each trial point corresponding to one
hyperparameter conﬁguration). Then, it uniformly allocates a budget to each trial point, and evaluates
its performance (i.e., objective function) given that budget. A proportion of trial points with worse
performance are deemed as to be less promising, and thus are removed from the set (namely, now
there are less trial points in the set). This procedure repeats several rounds until only a single trial
point remains in the set.
This idea is based on the assumption that a trial point’s performance obtained at earlier rounds is a
good indicator of its ﬁnal performance. Apparently, the more resources each trial point is allocated,
the more reliable this indicator is. Given a total ﬁnite budget B of resources, roughly each trial point
is allocated B/n resources. If a large n is used, each trial point would be allocated less resources,
thus earlier rounds performance may not reﬂect well the ﬁnal performance. On the contrary, if a
small n is used, although each trial point is more likely to be allocated sufﬁcient resources to reﬂect
its ﬁnal performance, the algorithm would suffer from a pool of less candidates. To alleviate this
dilemma, Hyperband actually tries out different values for n, and returns the best hyperparameter
conﬁguration among them.
Hyperband algorithm is presented in Algorithm 1 (see [7] for details).
The function
get_hyperparameter_configuration(n) returns a set of n i.i.d. trial points from the predeﬁned
conﬁguration space. The function run_then_return_obj_val(x, r) ﬁrst trains the trial point x with
r amount of resources, and then returns the objective function value f(x) evaluated after training. And
the function top_k(trials, obj_vals, k) ﬁrst ranks all the input trials according to their objective
function value obj_vals, and then returns the top k performing trial points.
Algorithm 1 Hyperband algorithm
input: maximum amount of resource that can be allocated to a single hyperparameter conﬁguration
R, and proportion controller η
output: one hyperparameter conﬁguration
1: initialization: smax = ⌊logη(R)⌋, B = (smax + 1)R
2: for s ∈{smax, smax −1, ..., 0} do
3:
n =
l
B
R
ηs
(s+1)
m
, r = Rη−s
4:
X = get_hyperparameter_conﬁguration(n)
5:
for i ∈0, ..., s do
6:
ni =

nη−i
7:
ri = rηi
8:
F = { run_then_return_obj_val(x, ri) : x ∈X}
9:
X = top_k(X, F, ⌊ni/η⌋)
return conﬁguration with the best objective function value
2.2
Bayesian Optimization
The main idea of Bayesian optimization is as follows. Since evaluating the objective function f for a
trial point x is very expensive, it approximates f using a probabilistic surrogate model that is much
cheaper to evaluate, and it is an iterative process: (1) The algorithm samples the next trial point
xt+1 according to the current surrogate model. (2) It evaluates f(xt+1). (3) It updates the surrogate
3

model based on the new data point (xt+1, f(xt+1)), and goes back to step (1). Bayesian optimization
samples trial points sequentially, and each trial point is sampled utilizing all the information in
the history (reﬂected by the built surrogate model). Namely, what will be sampled next is actually
determined by all of those sampled previously.
Bayesian optimization is presented in Algorithm 2. On line 3, the next trial point is sampled at the
place optimizing an acquisition function µ(x|Dt). The expected improvement in Equation 1 is usually
used as the acquisition function in the literature, where x+ is the trial point with the best objective
function value found in the ﬁrst t steps. Note that the expected improvement acquisition function
favors points with high variance and high mean value. Namely, it balances between exploration of
the not well explored regions and exploitation of the visited regions, in the conﬁguration space.
µ(x|Dt) = E(max{0, ft+1(x) −f(x+)}|Dt)
(1)
In particular, two types of probabilistic models have been proposed as the surrogate to compute
the expectation in Equation 1. Discriminative models like Gaussian process (GP) directly models
p(f(x)|x), while generative models like Tree-structured Parzen Estimator (TPE) models p(x|f(x))
and p(f(x)). As reported [1], TPE achieves better results than GP.
Algorithm 2 Bayesian optimization
1: initialization: D0 = ∅
2: for t ∈{1, 2, ...} do
3:
xt+1 = argmaxxµ(x|Dt)
4:
Evaluate f(xt+1)
5:
Dt+1 = Dt ∪{(xt+1, f(xt+1))}
6:
Update probabilistic surrogate model using Dt+1
2.3
Combination of Hyperband and Bayesian Optimization
Although both Hyperband and Bayesian Optimization are very powerful, each has its own strength
and weakness. We observe that the two approaches are actually complementary to each other, namely,
the weakness of one is the strength of the other, and vice versa, as illustrated next. Therefore, we
propose to combine them together to obtain an enhanced hyperparameter optimization algorithm.
Algorithm 3 Combination of Hyperband and Bayesian optimization
input: maximum amount of resource that can be allocated to a single hyperparameter conﬁguration
R, and proportion controller η
output: one hyperparameter conﬁguration
1: initialization: smax = ⌊logη(R)⌋, B = (smax + 1)R
2: for s ∈{smax, smax −1, ..., 0} do
3:
n =
l
B
R
ηs
(s+1)
m
, r = Rη−s
4:
for i ∈0, ..., s do
5:
ni =

nη−i
6:
ri = rηi
7:
if i == 0 then
8:
X = ∅, D0 = ∅
9:
for t ∈{1, 2, ..., ni} do
10:
xt+1 = argmaxxµ(x|Dt)
11:
f(xt+1) = run_then_return_obj_val(x, ri)
12:
X = X ∪{xt+1}
13:
Dt+1 = Dt ∪{(xt+1, f(xt+1))}
14:
Update probabilistic surrogate model using Dt+1
15:
else
16:
F = { run_then_return_obj_val(x, ri) : x ∈X}
17:
X = top_k(X, F, ⌊ni/η⌋)
return conﬁguration with the best objective function value
4

More speciﬁcally, on one hand, all the trial points in Hyperband are sampled independently. However,
once a trial point x is sampled and the objective function f(x) at that trial point is evaluated, this data
point (x, f(x)) tells us something about how our objective function behaves on the conﬁguration
space. Intuitively, if f(x) is a bad one, we should avoid sample trial points near x subsequently;
otherwise, we should consider sampling more trial points near x. Note that it is only reasonable to take
these actions under the condition that the objective function is smooth over the conﬁguration space,
which is usually a weak assumption (i.e., easy to be satisﬁed) for a wide spectrum of hyperparameter
optimization problems encountered in deep learning. Each trial point in Hyperband is sampled
independently from all the trial points sampled previously, thus it fails to utilize the lessons learned
in the history, which may result into wasting precious time on repeating errors that already happened
in history.
On the other hand, in Bayesian optimization, each trial point x is allocated sufﬁcient resources to
obtain the ﬁnal objective function value f(x). In deep learning, allocating sufﬁcient resources to
a single trial point usually means training a deep neural network to convergence, which may take
hours, days, or even weeks using modern GPU. In this case, one cannot afford allocating whatever
amount of resources required by a single trial point to obtain its ﬁnal objective function value, without
knowing in advance that this value is likely to be the best one among those of all the trial points.
From the above analysis of the weakness of each approach, we see that they are actually perfectly
complementary to each other. Trial points in Hyperband should be sampled sequentially, and each
trial point should be sampled according to the experience obtained at all previously sampled and
evaluated trial points, which is exactly how Bayesian optimization works. An early stopping like
mechanism as used in Hyperband should be adopted in Bayesian optimization, so that trials points
that are already worse than other trial points at early rounds should be abandoned, since their ﬁnal
performance is also less likely to be the best among all.
We propose to combine Hyperband and Bayesian optimization in a straightforward manner as follows.
We generally follow the process of Hyperband algorithm. However, the only difference is that, instead
of sampling all n trial points independently at once as in Hyperband, in our combination approach,
we sample trial points one by one using Bayesian optimization. More speciﬁcally, in each ﬁrst round
of hyperband (on different initial value of n), once a trial point xt+1 is sampled, its intermediate
performance f(xt+1) given the current allocated resources r0 is evaluated. This new data point
(xt+1, f(xt+1)) contributes to updating the surrogate probabilistic model in Bayesian optimization,
based on which the next trial point will be sampled.
As illustrated in Algorithm 3, the bulk of our combination algorithm is very similar to Hyperband
in Algorithm 1, and the major difference is from line 7 to line 14, which are basically Bayesian
optimization in Algorithm 2.
3
Experiments
In this section, we empirically evaluate the performance of our combination algorithm. We conduct
two major sets of experiments. The experiments in the ﬁrst set are those related to deep learning
problems mentioned in the Hyperband paper. In the second set, there is only one experiment (but
much more complicated and harder than those in the ﬁrst set), whose target is to ﬁnd a decomposed
neural network architecture of SSD [8] (one of the state-of-the-art object detectors) balancing well the
accuracy and speed for object detection. All our experiments are conducted in the Caffe framework.
In our combination algorithm, we choose TPE [1] as the Bayesian optimization part, due to its
supreme performance than its discriminative counterpart GP. In all the experiments, we compare
the performance of our combination algorithm, named as Hyperband_TPE, against three baselines:
Random search, TPE, and Hyperband.
3.1
LeNet and AlexNet
In this section, we repeat the experiments (four in total) related to deep learning problems in the
Hyperband paper. We strictly follow the setting up protocols in the paper, unless otherwise speciﬁed
below (which is largely due to that we want to restrict the total time taken by any approach to be no
more than a week on our two Titan X GPUs).
5

Figure 1: Average accuracy across 10 trials for LeNet on MNIST.
3.1.1
LeNet on MNIST
The experiment in this section is to train LeNet on MNIST dataset using mini-batch SGD. There
are four hyperparameters: Learning rate, batch size, and number of ﬁlters for the two convolutional
layers of LeNet. The range of feasible values each hyperparameter could take follows that in the
Hyperband paper.
For Hyperband and our combination algorithm, we set R = 81, and η = 3, the same as in the
Hyperband paper; and we empirically set up the number of training images corresponding to each unit
of R (i.e., one of the 81 pieces in this particular setting), which is not mentioned in the Hyperband
paper. These settings result into an equivalent number (in the sense of total time taken) of about 18
trial points for either TPE or random search, where each trial point consumes all 81 units of R. In
Hyperband paper, to make sure the statistical signiﬁcance of the results, it runs the algorithm 70
times, and computes the average result. To save time, we run each algorithm 10 times, and compute
the average.
The performance comparison of the four algorithms (random search, TPE, Hyperband, and Hy-
perband_TPE) is presented in Figure 1. The unit for the time axis is multiple of R used (in this
experiment, multiple of the 81 units), the same as in the Hyperband paper to make the comparison
hardware independent. The reason that curves for Hyperband and our combination do not start at
time 1 is that it takes some time for either algorithm to abandon all trial points but one, when the
algorithm produces an output hyperparameter conﬁguration.
Note that since this problem (i.e. train LeNet on MNIST) is an easy one, namely, there are many
different hyperparameter conﬁgurations that can produce a trained LeNet with pretty high accuracy on
MNIST, we see all four approaches quickly converges at a very high level (some even overlap). What
we learn is that on simple problems, where good hyperparameter conﬁgurations reside massively in
the searching space, no sophisticated hyperparameter optimization approach is needed. However, as
we will show later in other experiments, when the problems get more complicated, more sophisticated
approaches clearly have advantages over less sophisticated ones.
3.1.2
AlexNet on Cifar10, MRBI, and SVHN
The three experiments in this section is to train AlexNet respectively on three datasets: Cifar10 [5],
rotated MNIST with background images (MRBI) [6], and Street View House Number (SVHN) [9].
There are eight hyperparameters: Initial learning rate, l2 penalty for respectively three convolutional
layers and one fully connected layer, learning rate reduction, and scale and power for local response
normalization. We set the range of feasible values of each hyperparameter the same as that in the
Hyperband paper. Clearly, these are harder problems than the previous one, in terms of complexity of
neural network, hyperparameter searching space, and the datasets.
6

For Cifar10 and MRBI, R = 300; for SVHN, R = 600. η = 4 for all three experiments. These
numbers are the same as the Hyperband paper. Still, the number of training images corresponding to
each unit of R is set up empirically. These settings result into an equivalent number of about 18 trial
points for either TPE or random search, where each trial point consumes all units (300 or 600) of R.
We run each algorithm 10 times (the same as Hyperband paper this time), and compute the average
accuracy.
The performance comparison of the four algorithms (random search, TPE, Hyperband, and Hyper-
band_TPE) is presented in Figure 2. Still, the unit for the time axis is multiple of R used.
Unlike LeNet on MNIST, in these three problems, there are not as many hyperparameter conﬁgurations
that can produce high accuracy, which is reﬂected by the separation between the curves. We see the
two curves respectively for TPE and random search intertwine with each other, and the curve for
Hyperband is much higher than the previous two. Although Hyperband forms a very strong baseline,
yet our combination algorithm outperforms it slightly. We can also see that as the problem becomes
harder and harder, from SVHN to Cifar10 then to MRBI (see the scale of the accuracy for these three
problems), the gap between our combination algorithm and Hyperband also become larger. Note
that although it might be possible that given sufﬁcient or even inﬁnite resources, all hyperparameter
optimization algorithms may ﬁnally converge at a similar high accuracy, the target of the game here
is to ﬁnd a better solution as quickly as possible.
These results validate our idea of combining the strength of Hyperband and Bayesian optimization,
and they also show that the combination algorithm has bigger advantage over other approaches, as
the problems become more difﬁcult.
3.2
Decomposition of SSD
In this section, our target problem is to ﬁnd a low rank decomposed approximation neural network
of the Single Shot Detector (SSD) [8], to balance well between accuracy and speed. SSD is a fully
convolutional neural network with 21 convolutional layers for objects detection. It achieves real time
detection speed on high end GPU like Titan X, and competitive accuracy. However, on low end GPU
like K520 on Amazon EC2 instances, real time detection cannot be achieved by SSD. Therefore, it is
needed to speed up the computation, but probably at the cost of sacriﬁcing certain accuracy.
The low rank regularization technique proposed in [11] decomposes both the shape and weights
of each existing trained convolutional layer into some low rank approximation, by removing the
redundant information contained in the tensor formed by all ﬁlters of each convolutional layer, via
SVD. The produced low rank approximation is usually quicker than the original convolutional layer.
Speciﬁcally, suppose for one convolutional layer, there are N ﬁlters, each has C channels, and is
of size d × d spatially, then it is decomposed into two convolutional layers: First one has K ﬁlters,
C channels, size d × 1 spatially; and second one has N ﬁlters, K channels, size 1 × d spatially.
The hyperparameter K controls the degree of information compression: The smaller the value of
K is, the more aggressively the layer is compressed, thus the quicker but less accurate the resulted
approximation is.
We apply this low rank regularization technique on SSD (more speciﬁcally SSD300). Since SSD
has 21 convolutional layers, our hyperparameter conﬁguration space is of dimension 21, i.e., each
dimension corresponds to the value of K for one of the 21 convolutional layers, whose range is
between 1 and the original number of ﬁlters in that layer. In this experiment, our objective function
is not a single metric as in previous experiments, but a combination of two metrics, accuracy (in
terms of map) and speed (in terms of fps): α × map + fps, where α is a parameter balancing the
two metrics.
We test the accuracy of the network corresponding to each hyperparameter conﬁguration on PASCAL
VOC dataset [4] (the tessellation of training and validation is the same as that in the SSD paper).
Instead of directly reporting the accuracy of the decomposed approximation network, we actually
ﬁnetune it for a small number of epochs (speciﬁcally 5) to allow it have a chance to adapt better, and
report the accuracy after ﬁnetuning.
For Hyperband and our combination algorithm, we set R = 2500, η = 5, and the number of images
corresponding to each unit of R accordingly, to match the 5 epochs of ﬁnetuning. These settings
result into an equivalent number of about 18 trial points for either TPE or random search, where
7

(a) Cifar10
(b) MRBI
(c) SVHN
Figure 2: Average accuracy across 10 trials for AlexNet on Cifar10, MRBI, and SVHN.
8

Figure 3: Objective function value, map, and fps for low rank decomposition of SSD.
each trial point consumes all 2500 units of R. We run each algorithm only once in this experiment in
consideration of total running time.
The performance comparison of the four algorithms (random search, TPE, Hyperband, and Hyper-
band_TPE) is presented in Figure 3. Still, the unit for the time axis is multiple of R used.
This time, we are facing a deeper network, higher dimensionality for hyperparameter conﬁguration
space, larger and more complex dataset, so it is not hard to imagine that conﬁgurations with good per-
formance become even rarer (comparing to the size of the whole space). But again, our combination
algorithm shows better performance than other approaches.
4
Conclusion
We proposed a novel approach for hyperparameter optimization in deep learning. Our approach
combines the strength of both Hyperband algorithm and Bayesian optimization. We sampled trial
points balancing between exploitation and exploration, while allocating more computational budget
to more promising trial points. Experimental results validated that our combination approach could
ﬁnd better hyperparameter conﬁguration more quickly than other approaches, such as Random search,
Bayesian optimization, or Hyperband. Further more, the results also indicated that our approach
outperforms other approaches by a larger margin, as the hyperparameter optimization problem
become more complex and difﬁcult.
