Model-Based Testing,
Using Belief-Desire-Intentions Agents,
of Control Code for Robots
in Collaborative Human-Robot Interactions
Dejanira Araiza-Illan, Tony Pipe and Kerstin Eder∗
Abstract
The software of robotic assistants needs to be veriﬁed, to ensure its
safety and functional correctness. Testing in simulation allows a high de-
gree of realism in the veriﬁcation. However, generating tests that cover
both interesting foreseen and unforeseen scenarios in human-robot inter-
action (HRI) tasks, while executing most of the code, remains a challenge.
We propose the use of belief-desire-intention (BDI) agents in the test en-
vironment, to increase the level of realism and human-like stimulation
of simulated robots. Artiﬁcial intelligence, such as agent theory, can be
exploited for more intelligent test generation. An automated testbench
was implemented for a simulation in Robot Operating System (ROS)
and Gazebo, of a cooperative table assembly task between a humanoid
robot and a person. Requirements were veriﬁed for this task, and some
unexpected design issues were discovered, leading to possible code im-
provements. Our results highlight the practicality of BDI agents to auto-
matically generate valid and human-like tests to get high code coverage,
compared to hand-written directed tests, pseudorandom generation, and
other variants of model-based test generation. Also, BDI agents allow the
coverage of combined behaviours of the HRI system with more ease than
writing temporal logic properties for model checking.
1
INTRODUCTION
Interactions between humans and robots at home, at work, in hospitals and on
the street, have ethical and legal implications. As robot designers at software
level, we must ensure the safety of people, the environment and the robotic
∗This work was supported by the EPSRC grants EP/K006320/1 and EP/K006223/1, part
of the project “Trustworthy Robotic Assistants”. Dejanira Araiza-Illan and Kerstin Eder are
with the Department of Computer Science and the Bristol Robotics Laboratory, University of

with the Faculty of Engineering Technology and the Bristol Robotics Laboratory, University

arXiv:1603.00656v1  [cs.RO]  2 Mar 2016

systems, beyond just restricting the operation of robots to stop them when hu-
mans get close [8]. Furthermore, demonstrating safety and functional soundness
of robotic technologies opens the doors for them to become viable commercial
products.
Robotic code needs to be veriﬁed to eliminate runtime bugs, such as ﬂoat-
ing point issues and memory allocation, as in [29]. Additionally, robotic code
must be veriﬁed and validated when it interacts with other related code, the
robot’s hardware components, the environment and people. All these elements
introduce concurrency, and thus the emergence of possible unexpected and un-
desirable behaviours. A challenge to face in the veriﬁcation and validation of
any robotic platform is the interaction with complex, multifaceted, dynamic
and evolving environments [19, 1].
Consequently, verifying robotic software
goes beyond introducing correct data to stimulate the code, the classical soft-
ware veriﬁcation research focus [22]. Meaningful and realistic orchestration of
sequences of data inputs that simulate interesting scenarios is necessary for test-
ing robots in human-robot interactions (HRI) [20]. How can we achieve realism
in the orchestration, considering such complex environments?
Formal methods provide proofs for safety and functional soundness require-
ment satisfaction or violation. Most of these approaches require abstract models
of the robot’s elements (software and hardware) and its target environment (in-
cluding people). A challenge is the formulation of adequate models, that capture
suﬃcient detail to be meaningful, whilst being computationally manageable at
the same time. Current model checking approaches for robotic software veri-
ﬁcation require a great deal of abstractions from the physical world, often fo-
cusing on a decision-making level only (e.g., [31, 7]). Model checking tools for
code target speciﬁc programming languages such as ANSI-C1, C++2 and Java3.
Nonetheless, other robotic system components such as sensors and actuators,
and environments with people in HRI, ought to be considered in combination
with the code.
Testing can be performed on models of robotic systems and their environ-
ments in simulations [25], for real robots in the real world (as in [20]), or on
combinations of both [24]. In simulation, models can include a great level of
detail about the physical world in which HRIs take place. Real control code can
be coupled with simulated physics, sensing and actuating [25, 1]. The genera-
tion of eﬀective tests is the main challenge of testing, i.e., targeting meaningful
and interesting scenarios, while at the same time, exploring the state space to
discover unexpected bugs (e.g., covering all the code, most of the possible val-
ues of a variable, or most types of scenarios). Random sampling methods, such
as rapidly-exploring random trees [15], allow wide exploration. Constraints fo-
cus the test generation to create meaningful and valid tests [20]. Alternatively,
model-based test generation allows the substitution of constraint solving by
model analysis methods (e.g., model checking).
Although many languages and formalisms have been proposed for model-
1http://www.cprover.org/cbmc/
2http://divine.ﬁ.muni.cz/
3http://javapathﬁnder.sourceforge.net/

based test generation (e.g., UML and process algebras for concurrency [17], or
Lustre and MATLAB/Simulink for data ﬂow [30]), none of these are suitable
to represent complex environments with people, such as HRI scenarios. Is it
possible to use agent-based models, such as belief-desire-intention (BDI), for
test generation, to achieve more realistic human-like behaviour when stimu-
lating a robot? BDI agents are already used to model tasks of planning and
decision-process mechanisms, with the added beneﬁt of analysis via model check-
ing (e.g. [4]).
In microelectronics, Coverage Driven Veriﬁcation (CDV) is a method that
guides the generation of eﬀective tests, according to feedback from coverage
metrics, and automation in the testing process [26]. In [1], we illustrated the im-
plementation of automatic CDV testbench components (test generation, driver,
checker, coverage collection) to verify robotic code for HRI within a simulator de-
veloped within the robotics programming framework of Robotic Operating Sys-
tem (ROS). We experimented with unconstrained-pseudorandom, constrained-
pseudorandom and model-based test generation, to assess their strengths em-
pirically. The model-based approach consisted of two steps, where abstract test
sequences are generated ﬁrst via model checking of probabilistic timed automata
(PTA) in UPPAAL4. Subsequently a reﬁnement step transforms them into con-
crete test sequences, according to realistic models. These concrete sequences
are employed to stimulate the environment, sensors and actuators in the robot,
which will generate inputs for the robotic code under test, i.e. we stimulate the
robot’s code through exposure from its environment.
The main contribution of this paper is the exploitation of belief-desire-
intention (BDI) agents in testing environments, for model-based test genera-
tion. Through BDI test generation, we gain more realistic human-like stimulus
to verify robotics code in simulation, and simplify the task of generating inter-
esting test scenarios. Additionally, we illustrate BDI-based test generation on
a sophisticated HRI case study.
We applied testing in simulation to a scenario consisting of the cooperative
human-robot manufacture of a table, where the robot hands out the legs, and
the human attaches them to the table top. A simulator of the table manufacture
scenario was developed in ROS-Gazebo, coupled to an automated testbench in
ROS. We included constrained-pseudorandom and model-based test generation,
in a two-tiered approach, as we have found they complement each other to
explore the code under test and particular scenarios of interest as per our re-
quirements to verify [1]. We tested the high-level table assembly robotic control
code, to verify safety and functional requirements. Our results illustrate that
the code under test, and many combinations of the environment and the robotic
system, can be covered in exploration through the use BDI agents. The use of
BDI agents is a viable alternative for model-based test generation.
Our results highlight the potential of (a) using BDI agents for model-based
test generation to stimulate robotics code according to realistic scenarios; and
(b) having a framework for testing your robotic code in HRI simulators, for a
4http://www.uppaal.org/

cost-eﬀective software development process.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 introduces the table assembly task
scenario. Section 3 presents an overview of the CDV testbench components,
with emphasis on our proposed BDI-based test generation approach. Section
4 discusses the coverage and fault discovery results. Section 5 reviews related
work on test generation for robotic systems. We conclude the paper in Section
6.
2
COOPERATIVE MANUFACTURE TASK
Our case study is the cooperative assembly of a table consisting of 5 components,
4 legs and the table top, as shown in Fig. 1. The robot, BERT2 [16] (also in
Fig. 1), should hand over legs to the person, one at a time, when the person
asks the robot and only if the robot decides the human is ready. The robot
keeps count of the number of legs the person has taken, reporting that a table
has been completed if four legs have been handed over within a time threshold.
The handover of the legs is the critical part in this scenario. In a successful
assembly, a handover starts with a voice command from the person to the robot,
requesting a table leg. The robot then picks up a leg, holds it out to the human,
and signals for the human to take it. The human issues another voice command,
indicating readiness to take the leg. Then, the robot makes a decision to release
the leg or not, within a time threshold, based on a combination of three sensors:
“pressure,” indicating whether the human is holding the leg; “location,” visually
tracking whether the person’s hand is close to the leg; and “gaze,” visually
tracking whether the person’s head is directed towards the leg.
The sensing combination is the Cartesian product of “gaze”, “pressure” and
“location” readings, (G, P, L) ∈G × P × L. Each sensor reading is classiﬁed
into G, P, L = {¯1, 1}, 1 indicating the human is ready according to that sensor,
and ¯1 for any other value. If the human is deemed ready, GPL = (1, 1, 1), the
robot should decide to release the leg. Otherwise, the robot should not release
the leg and discard it (send back to a re-supply cycle). The robot will time
out while waiting for either a voice command from the human, or the sensor
readings, according to speciﬁed time thresholds.
A ROS ‘node’ in Python, with 264 statements implements the high-level
robot control of the assembly task, reusing as much as the handover code in [1]
as possible. The code was structured as a ﬁnite-state machine (FSM) using the
SMACH modules [5], as it allows to extract abstract models of the code in a
semi-automatic manner.
2.1
Requirements List
We considered a selected set of safety and functional requirements, for illustra-
tive purposes, adapted from the handover example in [1]:
1. If the gaze, pressure and location sense the human is ready, then a leg
shall be released (functional).

Figure 1: BERT2 robot, table to assemble, and their simulation versions
2. If the gaze, pressure or location sense the human is not ready, then a leg
shall not be released (functional).
3. The robot shall not close its hand when the human is too close (safety).
4. The robot shall start and work in restricted joint speed of less than 0.25
rad/s (safety).
2.2
ROS-Gazebo Simulator and Models
The ROS-Gazebo simulator, available online5, includes: (a) the robotic code
under test corresponding to the high-level control that enacts the table assembly
and object handover protocol; (b) physical models of the robot, human and
objects, with the physics of our world (gravity, collisions) in Gazebo, where the
elements move by updating their pose; (c) sensor models for pressure, gaze,
location and voice commands, with stochastically modelled errors due to the
object wobbling in the robot’s hand (pressure error), occlusions (location and
gaze errors), and noise (voice command errors); and (d) other code such as the
kinematic trajectory planner in MoveIt!6. We improved upon the requirements
veriﬁcation results in [1], implementing speed limits for safety to comply with
the 0.25 rad/s limit.
3
TESTBENCH COMPONENTS
We implemented testbench components: test generator, driver, checker, and
coverage collection, for the table assembly case study, based on our previous
work [1]. The modularity of the testbench components and the simulator fa-
cilitates re-usability, when elements are improved or modiﬁed to reﬂect design
changes, and extendibility, e.g., increasing the degree of detail or abstraction.
5https://github.com/robosafe/table
6http://moveit.ros.org/

Figure 2: Two tiered model-based test generation approach
3.1
Test Generation
We implemented constrained-pseudorandom and BDI-based test generation,
through a two-tiered approach, illustrated in Fig. 2.
This approach targets
the stimulation of robotics code through models of its environment and other
related software and hardware (sensors and actuators) in simulation, in a realis-
tic manner. In contrast, most generic approaches in software choose the inputs
to the code under test and apply them directly, which does not guarantee that
the code’s stimulation will be close to real-life stimuli, and can easily create
situations that would not occur in practice.
We synthesize an abstract test
sequence for the environment, sensors and actuators, which will stimulate the
robotic code in the interaction. These abstract actions come from models of the
robotic code under testing, in combination with the environment’s possibilities.
The abstract sequence is used by the simulator to assemble code fragments, so
that the human and the environment enact the test accordingly. Subsequently,
a concrete generator is employed for the instantiation of parameters used by
the assembled code, from legal and predeﬁned sets of the state space (e.g.,
equivalence class partitioning [10]), via constraint solving, search methods or
random sampling [11]. This process allows stimulating the human and environ-
ment components in the simulator to timely emulate motion in the real world.
Similar tiered abstraction-reﬁnement processes can be found in control systems
synthesis applications, such as [9, 21]. For example, a “move human hand fast”
sequence element is sent to the hand motion concrete generator, which computes
a motion trajectory for the hand in the 3D space under the “fast” constraint,
from the valid subset of the state space; then, “human talks to robot” is sent
to the corresponding concrete generator to select an input for the voice sensor.
Abstract models can be derived semi-automatically from the robot’s code,
from structuring it into ﬁnite-state machines (e.g., using the SMACH Python
module [5]). Furthermore, the concrete parameter generators can be replaced,
without modifying the abstract models. Thus, our approach facilitates reuse of

components and adaptation, due to its modularity.
In unconstrained, pseudorandom test generation, all the test inputs for
stimulating the code are chosen from sampling their domains, from carefully
chosen probability distributions to maximize coverage and fault detection [11].
Constraint solving and search methods have been employed to bias testing to-
wards valid and rare events, and speciﬁc kinds of scenarios for the robotic sys-
tems [15, 20]. Model-based approaches “argue” that biasing can be performed
in a more systematic and automatic manner.
For our two tiered-approach,
valid abstract test sequences are concatenated from the possible alphabet of
environmental and human actions in the HRI task, with uniform probability.
Constraints are used to ﬁx a particular sequence element, or to indicate order
relationships between the elements. This allows a deviation from a coherent
and rational human and environmental behaviour strictly following the HRI
protocol, to check that the code under test is robust.
In model-based test generation, model checking (e.g. in [1]) or exploration of
a model is performed, to synthesize a test sequence that complies with a property
or speciﬁcation [30]. In this paper, we use BDI agents to model the desired
functionality of the human and the robot in the HRI task, a table assembly.
BDI is an intelligent or rational agent architecture for multi-agent systems
(MAS). BDI models human practical reasoning, proposed by the philosopher
Michael Bratman, which focuses on ‘intentions’ or a list of future plans to
achieve a goal [3].
Diﬀerent software frameworks can be employed for BDI
agent development, such as Jason7, many of these implemented in Java. Jason
interprets agents expressed in the AgentSpeak language. An agent is deﬁned by
initial ‘beliefs’ (the initial state of the agent) as (ﬁrst-order) atomic formulae,
and a set of ‘plans’ forming a plan library. The agent has ‘goals’ (target states
of the world). A plan has a ‘head’, i.e., a triggering event and an expression
about beliefs (a ‘context’), and a ‘body’ or set of actions to execute. Plans are
triggered and executed following ‘events’, e.g., new beliefs or new goals, accord-
ing to the head. New beliefs are caused by other agents, or by the execution of
plans (self-beliefs) [2].
BDI agents are an ideal candidate to model rational human-like decision
making, based on beliefs and goals, in HRI. Consequently, we propose to model
the human using BDI, along with the environment and robotic system, for test
generation.
In our two-tiered test generation approach (abstract to concrete), the em-
ployed BDI agents are abstractions of the actions and the robot’s code FSM
structure. To generate abstract test sequences for the robot’s code, plan exe-
cution can be biased through controlling the beliefs, the goals, or both simul-
taneously, of the agents in the environment, e.g., modifying what the human is
perceiving, which will trigger a plan that changes the world the robot is exposed
to, thus triggering robot actions. The control of the agents can be achieved by a
‘meta’ agent supplying beliefs (or beliefs and goals) according to coverage met-
rics to explore all the environmental actions, and accumulating metrics about
7http://jason.sourceforge.net/wp/

1: E = list of beliefs and goals of the environment agents (e.g., human)
2: while cov(robotcode)̸=total or cov(environmentAgents)̸=total do
3:
Choose beliefs (or goals, or both) from E, for meta agent
4:
Run multi-agent system
5:
Write abstract test sequence into ROS
6:
Collect coverage of environment agents
7:
Collect coverage of robot’s code
8: end while
Figure 3: Algorithm to produce abstract test sequences via BDI agents
the robot’s code coverage (from the robot’s code agent).
The pseudo-algorithm for guiding the ‘meta’ agent to control the environ-
ment agents is provided in Fig. 3. The architecture of the human and environ-
ment agents is known beforehand, and so are the beliefs and goals that trigger
diﬀerent plans. Data structures of beliefs and goals to manipulate are explored,
selecting which ones will be triggered in the human or environment in a run of
the BDI multi-agent system. Once a run is ﬁnished, coverage statistics can be
gathered about the exploration of the robot’s code and the environment agents,
to modify the next exploration of beliefs and goals.
Each run of the multi-agent system will produce an abstract test sequence.
The production of abstract test sequences will stop when the robot’s code cov-
erage is within an acceptable threshold, or when the environment agents have
been fully explored. Note that we assume that the environment agents do not
have inﬁnite loops.
An example of plans of meta, human and robotcode agents is shown in Fig. 4.
In this example, a belief leg2 is added in the agent human by the agent meta,
which triggers the plan starting with +!activate:leg2. This plan triggers a
belief leg in the agent robotcode, which activates the plan +!waiting:leg.
For the case study, we manually selected which beliefs in the human agent
would be used for its manipulation, from all the available ones in the agent
description, e.g., number of legs to request, becoming bored, or setting up gaze,
pressure and location.
Selected combinations of these beliefs were triggered
automatically in the BDI model to generate abstract test sequences, to sys-
tematically explore the code under test, as well as combinations of interesting
behaviours of the human and the robot in the interaction.
Model-based test generation through model checking PTA in UPPAAL [1]
entails the need for an abstract model of the system and the HRI protocol
requirements, such that it is traversable; i.e., a model that avoids the state-
space explosion problem due to a large number of variables with several possible
values. These time consuming model abstraction processes are often iterated
by hand. Furthermore, reachability properties ought to be formulated for the
model checker to produce an abstract test, which requires a good understanding
of formal logics.

1 //Agent meta
2 /* Initial beliefs and rules */
3 /* Initial goals */
4 /* Plans */
5 +!control : true <- .send(human,tell,leg2).
6 ...
1 //Agent human
2 /* Initial beliefs and rules */
3 /* Initial goals */
4 !activate.
5 /* Plans */
6 +!activate : leg2 <- .send(robot_code,tell,leg).
7 ...
1 //Agent robotcode
2 /* Initial beliefs and rules */
3 /* Initial goals */
4 !waiting.
5 /* Plans */
6 +!waiting : not leg <- !waiting.
7 +!waiting : leg <- !grabLeg.
8 ...
Figure 4: Human and robot’s code BDI agent snipets in AgentSpeak
3.2
Driver
The driver routes each one of the concrete inputs to the respective simulator
component (e.g., the motion trajectory is fed to Gazebo to enact it on its 3D
world representation), to stimulate the robot through these environment, sensor
and actuator components.
3.3
Checker
We followed our approach of implementing assertion monitors as automata to
check each one of the requirements, using the SMACH module in Python [1].
The assertion monitors refer to diﬀerent types of “events”: (a) abstract (e.g.,
the robot moved and the human responded); (b) “continuous” parameters such
as the robot’s speed; (c) code-related (e.g., function foo was triggered; and (d)
combinations of any of the previous.
Automata monitors are spawned every time the triggering event occurs, and
the subsequent checks ensue. The results of the checks are recorded for coverage
collection. The automata can be spawned once until a change of events (i.e., a
new spawning occurs when the triggering event is true again, after some time
of it being false), or they can be spawned every speciﬁed ∆t time as long as the
triggering signal is true.

3.4
Coverage Collection
We implemented code statements coverage over the Python node under test,
instrumented via the ‘coverage’ Python module8 [1]. We also implemented as-
sertion coverage, assessing if an assertion monitor is triggered per test run [1].
Ideally, all the assertions must be covered by our test suite. Finally, we im-
plemented cross-product or Cartesian product coverage over critical abstract
action tuples ⟨Human, Robot⟩, such as four successful leg requests that were
handed over, occasions when the human got bored and the robot discarded the
leg, or occasions when the human acted but never sent the ﬁrst voice command
asking for a leg. Ideally, each tuple is encountered at least once within a test
suite.
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
We tested the robots code in the table assembly task, to verify the requirements
in 2.1.
The simulator and testbench were implemented in ROS Indigo and
Gazebo 2.2.5. The tests were run on a PC with Intel i5-3230M 2.60 GHz CPU,
8 GB of RAM, running Ubuntu 14.04. We used Jason 1.4.2 for BDI-based test
generation.
Coverage was collected according to the models in Section 3.4, when using
model-based and constrained-pseudorandom test generation methods. We gen-
erated 130 abstract tests from a possible total number of 32768, by constraints
over the possible beliefs for the human agent in the BDI multi-agent model,
provided by the meta agent. In particular, we sought to cover combinations of
human actions to set up the gaze, pressure and location sensor readings, such
that (a) GPL = (1, 1, 1) for all the leg handover sub-tasks in a test; (b) GPL is
not (1, 1, 1) in at least one of the leg handover sub-tasks in a test; (c) the human
successfully requested 4, 3, 2 or 1 legs in total per test (i.e., the protocol was
followed without the human being bored at least 4, 3, 2 or 1 times); and (d) legs
were requested, but the human did not send the second readiness voice com-
mand or got bored. We generated a concrete test from each abstract sequence
for (a)-(c) (128 concrete tests), and 5 concrete tests for each of the two abstract
tests for (d) (adding up to 138 tests in total), with seeds equal to the test num-
bers. Subsequently, we generated 30 abstract constrained-pseudorandom test
sequences where (e) no legs were requested at all, with one concrete test each
and seeds equal to the test numbers. The abstract tests in (d)-(e) would cause
the robot to time out. The robot is allowed to try a successful handover for a
maximum of four times per test. Each test ran for a maximum of 300 seconds.
4.1
Code Coverage
The results in Fig. 5 show that model-based methods are clearly better than
randomized exploration to reach high levels of code coverage quickly. These
8http://coverage.readthedocs.org/en/coverage-4.1b2/

0
20
40
60
80
100
number of tests
0
20
40
60
80
100
code coverage (%)
Unconstr.-Pseudornd.
Model Checking MB
BDI MB
Figure 5: Code coverage results
maximum coverage percentages are reached when the robot decides to release
or not to release an object to the person.
We reused the code coverage results from [1], regarding model-based (model
checking PTA in UPPAAL), and unconstrained, pseudorandom test generation.
We selected some of the BDI-based test generation results, for a fair comparison
of the code coverage regarding the handover part of the task.
The tests generated through model checking targeted reaching high levels
of code coverage with a single test, by formulating this coverage requirement
as temporal logic properties (for object release and no release).
With BDI
agents, we also reached high levels of code coverage, by explicitly asking the
meta agent to control the human agent to follow a handover to completion by
setting 4 beliefs; i.e., the human would ask for a leg, then wait until the robot
is ready, then set the head and hand, and ﬁnally indicate readiness to take the
object. This process of setting beliefs to trigger plans was more intuitive than
formulating temporal logic properties.
4.2
Assertion Coverage
The assertion coverage results are shown in Table 1. We recorded the number
of tests where the requirement was satisﬁed (Passed), not satisﬁed (Failed) or
not checked (NC).
Req. 2 was satisﬁed in all the tests, and Req. 1 was not satisﬁed only in
one instance, as the release of the object took a longer time than the speciﬁed
time threshold. Req. 3 is not satisﬁed in some tests, as the person’s hand is
allowed to get close to the robot gripper when it closes. To improve this issue,

Table 1: Requirements (assertion) coverage
Req.
Constrained-Pseudorandom
BDI Model-Based
Passed
Failed
NC
Passed
Failed
NC
1
0/30
0/30
30/30
90/138
1/138
47/138
2
0/30
0/30
30/30
100/138
0/138
38/138
3
0/30
0/30
30/30
138/138
12/138
0/138
4
30/30
0/30
—
138/138
0/138
—
the person’s hand would need to be tracked, and the robot gripper stopped
accordingly.
Req. 4, inspired by the standard ISO 10218-1 for industrial robots, is satis-
ﬁed in all tests. From the observed results in [1], speed thresholds were enforced
in the kinematic planning executed by the MoveIt! package, which were obeyed
by the system.
4.3
Cross-Product Functional Coverage
Table 2 shows the coverage results for reachable tuples of interest, including
when all requested legs were handed over, at least one leg was not handed over,
the human was bored in a test and the robot discarded the leg, and the human
never requested a leg successfully. All the tuples were reached at least once in
total. The results reﬂect the rareness of GPL = (1, 1, 1) (tuples 1, 4 and 7) for
all the requested legs in a run, considering errors in the sensor readings, and
the likelihood of this GPL combination compared to the other 7 possibilities.
4.4
Discussion
The formulation of BDI agents allowed for models of the HRI task that rep-
resent rational human-like actions. Through this modelling scheme, the HRI
protocol can be traversed exhaustively by controlling some of the agents via
their beliefs.
Compared to model checking, it is not necessary to formulate
temporal logic reachability properties, which requires a good understanding of
formal logics, and a greater degree of manual input. Furthermore, BDI agents
are easier to program, by specifying plans of actions, instead of constructing
PTA in UPPAAL. The latter needs several cycles of abstraction to deal with
the state-space explosion problem, i.e. to be traversable by model checking.
Our approach moves model-based test generation towards automated coverage-
directed generation [26]. Beliefs in the agents can be triggered to satisfy coverage
goals, automated further by adding feedback loops in the algorithm of Fig. 3.
The results in this section prove that high percentages of coverage were achieved
quickly and eﬃciently using BDI agents, in less than 200 tests. Furthermore,
“directed tests” can be assembled from the BDI agents, by introducing con-
straints for their beliefs.

Table 2: Reachable cross-product coverage
Tuple: ⟨Human, Robot⟩
Constr.,P.rand.
BDI
TOTAL
1
⟨4 legs, GPL = (1, 1, 1) × 4⟩
0/30
1/138
1/168
2
⟨4 legs, GPL ̸= (1, 1, 1) for at least 1 leg⟩
0/30
15/138
15/168
3
⟨4 legs+bored, Sensing timed out⟩
0/30
16/138
16/168
4
⟨3 legs, GPL = (1, 1, 1) × 3 legs ⟩
0/30
1/138
1/168
5
⟨3 legs, GPL ̸= (1, 1, 1) for at least 1 leg⟩
0/30
15/138
15/168
6
⟨3 legs+bored, Sensing timed out⟩
0/30
16/138
16/168
7
⟨2 legs, GPL = (1, 1, 1) × 2 legs ⟩
0/30
2/138
2/168
8
⟨2 legs, GPL ̸= (1, 1, 1) for at least 1 leg⟩
0/30
15/138
15/168
9
⟨2 legs+bored, Sensing timed out⟩
0/30
14/138
14/168
10
⟨1 leg, GPL = (1, 1, 1)⟩
0/30
11/138
11/168
11
⟨1 leg, GPL ̸= (1, 1, 1)⟩
0/30
22/138
22/168
12
⟨1 leg+bored, Sensing timed out⟩
0/30
5/138
5/168
13
⟨No leg, Timed out⟩
30/30
0/138
30/168
5
RELATED WORK
Testing of robotic systems can be performed in a real-life setting [20], completely
in simulation [25], or in combinations of simulation and real components [24],
i.e., hardware-in-the-loop.
Our BDI approach oﬀers a novel solution for the
two latter cases. In our approach, we explore the code mainly for ﬁnding and
eliminating functional bugs, i.e., for safety and functional soundness, although
runtime bugs can be found by instrumenting the code with relevant assertion
monitors.
Test generation research has focused on applications where the tests have
relatively small sets of data types, e.g., a timing sequence for controllers [20],
producing images to verify image processing software9, or a set of state space
inputs for a controller [15]. In our approach, the inputs to the simulator become
combinations of these and several diﬀerent types. Thus, our generation problem
is much more complex and that is why we used the two tiered approach, from
abstract to concrete tests.
Constraint solving requires mathematical models of the inputs to the system
(code) to stimulate, in the form of constraint programs or optimization programs
to solve [20].
Some heuristics are needed to help the solvers, e.g., orders of
variables. Search methods are an alternative to solve constraint programs or
optimization problems [18, 15, 6, 28].
Nevertheless, heuristics to guide the
search are needed, e.g., cost functions. Hybrid systems approaches require the
9http://development.objectvideo.com/index.html

formulation of the test generation problem into a hybrid model (e.g., hybrid
automata) [14, 6], which means a great deal of abstraction and manual input in
practice.
Other model-based approaches seek to test models at the same level of ab-
straction as the model-based test generation [13], or they focus on testing high-
level functionality [17, 31, 7]. Thus, test generation is much easier to implement
than for our testing problem, which targets the real robotics code in HRI realistic
scenarios. Our model-based test generation approach is based on divide-and-
conquer, simplifying the constraint solving or search problem. This abstract-
concrete process has been proposed for the synthesis of hybrid controllers that
satisfy properties [9, 21].
To the best of our knowledge, BDI agents have not been used as the mod-
elling formalism for model-based test generation before. A multi-agent frame-
work has been proposed in [12] for model-based test generation in software
testing. Agent programs are in charge of exploring a UML model of the code,
generating all the scenarios of the if-then-else conditions and branches. BDI
agents have been tested, with respect to the interaction behaviours of multi-
agent systems [27], or single agents (units) in terms of the correctness of their
beliefs (e.g., value combinations), plans (e.g., triggering the correct plan ac-
cording to the context), and events or messages (e.g., sending them at the right
time) [32, 33, 23]. In this paper we turn the table and introduce BDI agents
into the test environment, for intuitive and eﬀective test generation.
6
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we presented the use of belief-desire-intention (BDI) agents for
model-based test generation, in the context of verifying robotic code for HRI in
simulation. BDI agents allow more realistic human-like stimulus, whilst simul-
taneously facilitating the generation of interesting events, to gain good coverage
levels of the code under test, and the possibilities of the robot and the environ-
ment.
We developed a CDV testbench in the context of HRI, for a robotic simulator
in ROS-Gazebo, where a human and a robot collaboratively manufacture a
table. The use of the CDV methodology simpliﬁed the testing processes, through
automated test generation, driving of tests, checking assertions to monitor the
satisfaction of functional and safety requirements, and coverage collection. Tests
were derived to stimulate the human and environment, which stimulates the
robot’s code under test, in an indirect, but more realistic manner. The test suite
was generated in two tiers, where abstract stimulus sequences are computed ﬁrst,
and then concretized through constrained random sampling. We complemented
BDI-based test generation with constrained, pseudorandom generated abstract
tests. Our results highlight the potential of using BDI agents for test generation,
stimulating the code according to realistic scenarios, from complex and detailed
models of the environment and the robot’s components.
In the future, we plan to experiment with the composition and control op-

tions of the BDI agents (e.g., using both beliefs and goals). Eﬃcient and in-
telligent forms to control the BDI agents, preferably in an automated manner,
need to be explored. Potentially, agents can be fused, made to learn, or improve
coverage by themselves, among other options. Model checking could also be
used to explore the BDI multi-agent system. Also, we would like to introduce
feedback loops to guide the BDI agents to produce eﬀective tests.
