1
Abstract— Objectives: Identifying suicidality including suicidal 
ideation, attempts, and risk factors in electronic health record data 
in clinical notes is difficult. A major difficulty is the lack of training 
samples given the small number of true positive instances among 
the increasingly large number of patients being screened.  This 
paper describes a novel methodology that identifies suicidality in 
clinical notes by addressing this data sparsity issue through zero-
shot learning. Materials and Methods: U.S. Veterans Affairs 
clinical notes served as data. The training dataset label was 
determined using diagnostic codes of suicide attempt and self-
harm. A base string associated with the target label of suicidality 
was used to provide auxiliary information by narrowing the 
positive training cases to those containing the base string. A deep 
neural network was trained by mapping the training documents’ 
contents to a semantic space.  For comparison, we trained another 
deep neural network using the identical training dataset labels and 
bag-of-words features. Results: The zero shot learning model 
outperformed the baseline model in terms of AUC, sensitivity, 
specificity, and positive predictive value at multiple probability 
thresholds. In applying a 0.90 probability threshold, the 
methodology identified notes not associated with a relevant ICD-
10-CM code that documented suicidality, with 94% accuracy. 
Conclusion: This new method can effectively identify suicidality 
without requiring manual annotation.   
 
Keywords— Suicide, Clinical Notes, NLP, Zero-Shot Learning 
I. INTRODUCTION 
uicide is a significant problem in the United States, 
increasing 35.2% from 1999 to 2018, and from 10.5 to 14.2 
suicides per every 100,000 individuals in that same time period 
[1] In 2020, 45,979 people died from suicide, and 
approximately 1.2 million attempted suicide in the United 
States [2] Its estimated cost is over $70 billion annually in lost 
productivity and medical care [3]; this calculation does not 
include residual costs from the estimated 4-17 people closely 
tied to the suicide decedent who are left bereaved [4]. Suicide, 
however, is a complicated problem that includes a dynamic web 
of individual-level risk factors (e.g., depression, substance use 
behaviors, personality traits), interpersonal risk factors (e.g., 
violence, victimization), and community-level factors (e.g., 
unemployment, stigmatization of mental illness) [5, 6].   
 
1Biomedical Informatics Center; The George Washington University; 
Washington DC, USA; 
2VA Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA; 
3Department of Emergency Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, 
CT, USA; 4PRIME Center, VA Connecticut Healthcare System, West Haven, 
CT, USA; 5Research, VA Connecticut Healthcare System, West Haven, CT, 
Veterans are especially affected by suicide, with an age- and 
sex-adjusted rate that is 1.5 times higher than nonveterans [7]. 
The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) operates the single 
largest integrated health care system in the U.S., and has 
devoted resources to suicide prevention, including the Suicide 
Prevention Applications Network (SPAN), embedding suicide 
prevention coordinators and special reporting measures in 
facilities [8], increased mental health staffing, partnerships with 
community care organizations, and enhanced surveillance and 
monitoring through its electronic health record (EHR) system 
[9, 10]. Additionally, the VA has continual efforts to develop 
predictive analytics to identify patients at the highest risk of 
suicide [8, 11] The data elements for these predictive analytic 
algorithms rely on structured data (e.g., International 
Classification of Disease [ICD] diagnosis codes, prescription 
data, socio-demographic data, care utilization metrics) [12] 
which often provide an incomplete record [13, 14]. Less is 
known about how unstructured data, such as contained in 
clinical notes, can contribute to suicidality (i.e., suicidal 
ideation or attempt) identification and prevention. Given that a 
suicide attempt is one of the greatest risk factors for subsequent 
suicide death, a more thorough means of detecting such events 
is warranted [15].  
A. Background and Significance 
Natural language processing (NLP) combined with machine 
learning may add value to suicide documentation research.  
Supervised machine learning methods use “supervised”, or pre-
classified data.  However, naïve attempts at note retrieval using 
keyword search alone quickly demonstrate the difficulty of this 
problem, as words such as “suicide” occur in standard 
questionnaires which are included in many notes, with few 
actually documenting suicidality. For instance, in a prior 
experiment we carried out, we randomly collected 1,000 VA 
notes containing the term “suicidal” or “suicide” from 1,000 
individual patients and performed manual chart review for 
affirmed suicidality. Only 1.57% of these notes documented 
actual suicidality. Patient reluctance to disclose suicidal 
ideation provides a further complicating factor [16, 17]. As a 
result, a patient’s negative response to a suicide ideation inquiry 
may not reflect their real feelings or intentions.  Additionally, 
USA; 6VA Connecticut Healthcare System, West Haven, CT, USA; 7Suzanne 
Dworak-Peck School of Social Work, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA; 8Department of Internal Medicine, Yale School of 
Medicine, West Haven, CT; 
 
Leveraging Contextual Relatedness to Identify Suicide 
Documentation in Clinical Notes through Zero Shot 
Learning 
T. Elizabeth Workman, Ph.D.1,2, Joseph L. Goulet, Ph.D.3,6, Cynthia A. Brandt, M.D.3,6, Allison R. 
Warren, Ph.D.4, Jacob Eleazer, Ph.D.4, Melissa Skanderson, M.S.W.5, Luke Lindemann, Ph.D.6, John 
R. Blosnich, Ph.D.7, John O’Leary, M.Ed.6,8, Qing Zeng-Treitler, Ph.D.1,2  
S 

 
 
2
relying on structured data alone will result in incomplete 
identification of patients who have or are experiencing 
suicidality, because relevant coding is prone to underuse [8].  
However, not all clinical notes associated with relevant 
structured data document suicidality.  For example, a note 
documenting a secondary service such as group therapy, or a 
note documenting fluid intake may not directly document 
suicidality.  
Prior attempts to apply NLP and machine learning are often 
limited to mental health-oriented notes and may suffer if using 
imbalanced data. Levis et al.[18] applied sentiment analysis and 
various machine learning algorithms to classify suicide, using 
VA psychotherapy notes, yielding area under the curve (AUC) 
ratings comparable to chance. Fernandes et al.[19] obtained 
excellent NLP performance in their study of clinical notes from 
the Clinical Record Initiative Search (CRIS), but performance 
was computed after removing neutral (non-suicide) results from 
their machine learning output. Carson et al. enriched notes 
associated with suicide attempt that were then used to train a 
random forest model achieving 83% sensitivity, but only 22% 
specificity [20].  Cook et al. [21] applied a bag-of-words 
approach with machine learning to identify suicide ideation and 
psychiatric symptoms using notes for patients identified as 
having performed self-harm, achieving 61% PPV (positive 
predictive value), 59% sensitivity, and 60% specificity, with 
results varying  depending on the task. Zhang et al. sought to 
identify psychological stressors using a pre-annotated dataset of 
psychiatric evaluation records from the CEGS N-GRID 2016 
challenge [22] as a gold standard, for a conditional random 
fields machine learning model, [23] yielding final F scores of 
73.91% and 89.01%, respectively, on exact and inexact stressor 
matching, and 97.73% and 100% respectively, for exact and 
inexact suicide recognition on instances of the positive 
keywords with the stressors; however, their evaluation methods 
for this are not detailed.   
Zhong et al. applied structured data and NLP to identify 
suicidal behavior in pregnant women, achieving PPV of 76% 
and 30%, for women identified through relevant diagnostic 
codes and through NLP for women not receiving a relevant 
diagnostic code, respectively [24].  Obeid et al.[25] trained a 
convolutional neural network that achieved an AUC of 0.882 
and an F1 score of 0.769 in predicting relevant suicide ICD 
codes in subsequent years.  Using notes from psychiatric 
encounters, Cusick et al. [26] developed a rule-based NLP tool 
to identify positive instances of suicide-oriented keywords that 
leveraged NegEx. [27] They also developed different weakly-
supervised machine learning models. A convolutional neural 
network receiving Word2Vec [28] word embeddings as input 
achieved precision, recall, F1 score, and AUC values of 0.81, 
0.83, 0.82, and 0.946.  In a subsequent evaluation the 
convolutional neural network correctly classified 87% of the 23 
notes (of 5000 clinical notes) receiving a positive classification, 
from notes for patients diagnosed with depression or prescribed 
an antidepressant.  In a related task Tsui et al. [29] used prior 
structured and unstructured data (clinical notes from history, 
physical examination, progress notes and discharge summaries) 
of inpatient and emergency room patients with a coded suicide 
attempt, to identify first-time suicide attempts in a case-control 
study.  An ensemble of extreme gradient boosting (EXGB) 
yielded best performance, with an AUC ranging from 91.9% to 
93.2%, according to time window between prior data and 
suicide attempt diagnosis.  Recently, Rozova et al. obtained 
promising results (87% AUC) using a gradient boosting model, 
although the study was limited to emergency room triage notes 
[30]. 
Seeking suicidality in all types of clinical notes, among all 
types of patients, or when hampered by imbalanced data, is 
indeed a complex task. Some of the methods in the papers cited 
above tend to suffer from low precision, specificity, and 
possibly also low sensitivity (recall).  Identifying probability 
thresholds addresses these problems, providing flexibility for a 
given task. For example, a high probability threshold (e.g., the 
top ten percent) can serve as a means for identifying 
documentation indicating suicidality and its risk with high 
precision. When the prevalence is very low, which is often the 
case of true positive suicidality documentation, the optimal 
threshold needs to balance metrics such as the true positive rate 
(sensitivity, also known as recall), specificity, and the positive 
predictive value (precision).  A strategic implementation of a 
technique like Zero-Shot Learning may also provide accurate 
identification of suicidality in clinical notes. 
B.   Zero-Shot Learning 
Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) enables predictions on unseen 
data using a model trained on data that has labels that are 
different than those of the unseen data [31, 32].  It largely 
operates by mapping select properties of the data (i.e., the 
“feature space”) to a semantic representation (i.e., the “semantic 
space”) that enables prediction of unseen classes [33]. In other 
words, auxiliary information must be provided on the labels of 
the unseen classes to make it possible for a trained model to 
recognize them in the testing data.   
 ZSL has been applied in several computer vision tasks [34, 
35], as well as NLP tasks [36].  Accordingly, a feature space 
can consist of data derived from images [37] or text [36].  The 
semantic representation can be based on several different 
approaches, including data attributes, semantic word vectors as 
those provided by skip-gram or continuous-bag-of-word  
architectures [33] or BERT output [38], or knowledge graphs 
[33].  Examples in NLP applications include semantic utterance 
classification [39] multilingual translation [40] and emotion 
detection [41]. However, other than Sivarajkumar and Wang’s 
work [38] there is little ZSL research in unstructured clinical 
text data.  
Naturally, different semantic representations affect the 
accuracy of ZSL [42]. In this study, we leveraged word 
embedding and usage context.    
C. Objectives 
We investigated a ZSL methodology applied to a binary 
suicidality classification task. The training dataset was 
constructed using diagnostic codes (ICD-10-CM codes) related 
to suicide. Our target label is the broader concept of suicidality. 
To enable ZSL, a base string representing suicidality was 

 
 
3
selected. We then built the semantic space by identifying key 
features associated with suicidality in the training dataset. A 
DNN model was developed using the training data and tested 
on two different sets of unseen data with the unseen label of 
suicidality. Specifically, we sought to answer: 
 Will ZSL effectively identify suicidality documentation 
from among all types of clinical notes, using review by 
clinicians as the reference standard? 
 Will ZSL effectively identify suicidality or suicide risk 
documentation from among clinical notes not associated with 
a relevant ICD-10-CM code, by probability threshold, in terms 
of precision, using the same reference standard? 
We are unaware of previous descriptions of this methodology 
and to our knowledge it has not been used prior to this study.  
II. METHODS 
A. Training Data 
A training dataset was created using two corpora. The first 
corpus consisted of 50,000 randomly selected VA clinical notes 
from outpatient encounters recorded between 2016 and 2019 
which contained the base string “suicid” (e.g. “suicide”, 
“suicidal” ) and were associated with at least one ICD-CM-10 
code identified by the National Health Statistics Report from 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 
indicating suicide attempt or intentional self-harm.[43]  This 
corpus is referred to as stringAndDx (9170 unique patients). 
The second corpus consisted of 50,000 randomly selected VA 
clinical notes from outpatient encounters recorded between 
2016 and 2019 that were associated with other ICD-CM-10 
codes that were irrelevant to suicidality or self-harm. These 
notes were extracted from patients matching the stringAndDx 
patients in age (at the time of document retrieval), race, and 
ethnicity.  This second corpus is referred to as noDx (8638 
unique patients).  Each corpus was preprocessed by 
transforming all letters to lower case, removing basic 
formatting markup and punctuation, separating character 
strings into tokens (words), separating relevant concatenated 
tokens (e.g., “suicidalhomicidal” to “suicidal” ”homicidal”), 
and removing all tokens that did not entirely consist of letters.   
B.  Semantic Space Feature Extraction and Mapping 
The task to build the semantic space was carried out in three 
steps: First, we identified a list of features that are potentially 
relevant for the positive training label. Second, we created word 
embeddings using a skip-gram architecture. Third, we 
identified context words of the selected features using the word 
embeddings.  In a fourth step, a contextual weight is assigned 
to each feature for each document in mapping the semantic 
space to the feature space.  
In the first step, inverse document frequency (TF-IDF) 
analysis was used to identify the n most important terms in each 
corpus.  For this investigation, n = 1000.  TF-IDF evaluates 
term frequency using the count of documents containing a given 
term.  In each document, the relative frequency of each term is 
weighted by the log of the number of documents in the corpus 
divided by the number of documents containing the term, as 
shown in (1) 
𝑡𝑖,𝑗 = 𝑡𝑓𝑖,𝑗 ∗𝑙𝑜𝑔( 𝑛
𝑑𝑓𝑖
) 
 
where ti,j is term i in document j, tfi,j is the relative frequency of 
term i in document j, n is the total number of documents, and 
dfi is the number of documents containing term i.  Because TF-
IDF is a document-based measurement, we used the mean TF-
IDF value for each term in its respective corpus.   The words 
with the top TF-IDF scores that are unique to the stringAndDx 
corpus were treated as features.  Figure 1 illustrates this process.  
Each circle represents terms from one of the corpora. Sets a and 
b are the words with the top n TFIDF scores for stringAndDx 
and noDx, respectively. Set c is the overlap between a and b. 
The feature set F contains words that are in set a, but not in the 
overlap set c or in set b (f  a and f  c and f  b).  
 
 
Figure 1. Feature identification. Words that are deemed as features are in set a, 
excluding words in c and b. 
 
In the second step, we created a Word2Vec model using the 
stringAndDx corpus. In this study, the model was a shallow 
neural network with the hidden layer containing 300 nodes, 
applying the skip-gram architecture, with an analytic window 
size of 5, trained through 10 iterations. 
In the third step, we identified the top m context words for 
each feature word using the word embeddings from the 
Word2Vec model. The m words most similar to each feature 
word, according to cosine similarity values, served as its 
context words. In this investigation, m = 50. 
In the fourth step, we map the feature space, i.e. a document’s 
preprocessed content, to the semantic space. A weight v is 
assigned to each feature word for each document, based on its 
occurrence with its context words in a window in the 
document’s text.  This weight is the summed total of the cosine 
similarity between the feature and a co-occurring context word 
multiplied by the mean TF-IDF value of the feature word. The 
formula is shown in (2) 
 
𝑣=
∑
𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑆𝑖𝑚(𝑥, 𝑦) ∗𝑡𝑓𝑖𝑑𝑓(𝑥)
𝑥∈𝐹,𝑦∈𝐷
 
 
where x is a feature in F, the set of features in the semantic 
space, and y is a context word of set D, the context words for x 
in the semantic space, which occurs in a five-word window 
around x in the document’s text. This process is illustrated in 
Figure 2, where “pattern” (highlighted in light gray) is a feature 
word, and “internalizing” and “fitful” (highlighted in dark gray) 
are among its set of context words and appear in a five-word 
window. 
(2) 
(1) 

 
 
4
 
 
Figure 2.  Example of deriving a feature weight using (2) 
 
If a feature word is not in the text, its value is zero for the 
given document. 
C. Model Development  
20,000 documents were randomly selected from each corpus 
(stringAndDx and noDx). We trained a DNN model (here 
referred to as the ZSL DNN) consisting of five fully-connected 
hidden layers of alternating sizes of 30 or 70 nodes, with each 
layer implementing a dropout rate of 0.5.  We implemented the 
Adam optimizer [44], with a learning rate of 0.0012, beta 1 
value of 0.92, beta 2 value of 0.9992, and an epsilon value of 
1e-08, with binary cross entropy as the loss function, and the 
sigmoid function in the output layer, since it was a binary 
classification task.  The architecture and hyperparameters were 
chosen on empirical grounds, after experimentation.  Each 
document from the stringAndDx corpus was classified as “1” (a 
generic positive instance), and each document from the noDx 
corpus was classified as “0” (a generic negative instance).  
These labels do not indicate whether or not the given document 
directly pertains, or not pertains, to suicidality or its risks, but 
an association with a structured data element, and for those 
labeled “1”, also containing a base string.  Balancing the 
positive and negative approximated training datasets in this 
manner (i.e., providing balanced training examples) addressed 
the problematic issue of otherwise training a model with few 
positive and many negative instances. We implemented a 60% 
training, 20% validation, and 20% testing split in developing 
the ZSL DNN.  Figure 3 illustrates the method. 
 
   
Figure 3. Method. The corpora stringAndDx (2016-19), noDx (2016-19), 
testSet1 (2020), and testSet2 (2020) are unique and extracted from all clinical 
notes based on associated ICD-10-CM codes, and in the case of 
stringAndDx, where a base string is also present; corpora content is 
preprocessed.  The stringAndDx and noDx corpora are used in the TF-IDF 
analysis to identify feature words that are unique to stringAndDx (step 1). 
stringAndDx is applied to a skip-gram model to produce word embeddings 
(step 2). Feature words and their significant context words (determined 
through the word embeddings) form the semantic space (step 3). The 
contents of stringAndDx and noDx are mapped to the semantic space, using 
a function to determine feature word weights (step 4). The mapped contents 
of stringAndDx and noDx documents are used to train the ZSL DNN, using 
generic labels 1 and 0, respectively.    The mapped contents of unseen 
testSet1 and testSet2 notes were classified by the trained ZSL DNN, for the 
classes (a) containing suicidality documentation, or (b) not containing 
suicidality documentation.  Human annotation independently classified 
random documents from testSet1 and testSet2 for the same classes (a) 
containing suicidality documentation, or (b) not containing suicidality 
documentation; human annotation also assessed documents from testSet2 
containing the base string that received a probability of 0.90 or greater, for 
these classes and suicidality risk factors. 
 
D. Evaluation 
The authors randomly retrieved 5,000 different clinical notes 
recorded in 2020 that were associated with at least one of the 
relevant IDC-10-CM codes. This corpus is subsequently 
labeled as testSet1. The authors also randomly retrieved 5,000 
different clinical notes recorded in 2020 that were associated 
with other IDC-10-CM codes irrelevant to suicidality or self-
harm.  This corpus is subsequently labeled testSet2.   
The contents of each of the notes in testSet1 and testSet2 were 
mapped to the semantic space, i.e., deriving a weight for each 
feature word as described earlier in the fourth step.  Then, the 
trained ZSL DNN was used to classify the notes in testSet1 and 
testSet2 as (a) containing suicidality documentation, or (b) not 
containing suicidality documentation.   
In joint sessions, two clinical psychologists familiar with VA 
clinical note documentation together identified suicidality (i.e., 
current or past suicide ideation or attempt) in 200 notes 
randomly selected from testSet1 and testSet2 (100 from each 
test set), after being instructed to look for documentation for 
these specific events. They addressed differences of opinion 
through discussion and mutual consensus during the joint 
sessions.  In a second evaluation, to explore how the 
application’s output may serve to identify patients who had 
experienced or were at risk for suicidality, but never formally 
diagnosed as such, the clinicians examined the testSet2 notes 
containing the base string “suicid" that received a probability 
value of 0.90 or greater from the trained ZSL DNN, for 
documentation of suicidality and/or its risk factors, according 
to NIH guidelines.[45] This threshold was chosen in order to 
explore how high-probability documents (i.e. the top 10% in 
terms of probability) would be representative in identifying 
documented suicidality or its risk factors with high precision, 
thus addressing our second question.   
1) Baseline Comparison 
For comparative purposes, the 163 most frequent bigrams 
unique to the stringAndDx corpus were identified and used in a 
bag-of-words baseline model.  We trained a DNN (here referred 
to as the Baseline DNN) using these 163 bigrams as features for 
the 20,000 stringAndDx documents and the 20,000 noDx 
documents. This baseline DNN was also used to classify the 
Document Text: “The patient has a pattern of internalizing 
criticism from his family.  This pattern sometimes results in fitful 
outbursts.” 
TF-IDF value of feature word “pattern”: 0.0062 
Cosine similarity of “pattern” and “internalizing”: 0.4673 
Cosine similarity of “pattern” and “fitful”: 0.3824 
Feature weight for “pattern”:  
(0.0062 * 0.4673) + (0.0062 * 0.3824) = 0.0053 

 
 
5
notes in testSet1 and testSet2, for (a) containing suicidality 
documentation, or (b) not containing suicidality documentation, 
using the 163 most frequent bigrams as features. 
III. RESULTS 
The first step of the new method (described in Methods) 
identified 163 feature words associated with suicidality 
diagnosis.  The top thirty feature words are listed in Table I. No 
form of the base string “suicid” was found among the 163 final 
feature words. Both “suicide” and “suicidal” were prominent 
terms in both the noDx and stringAndDx corpora, along with 
terms like “psychiatrist” and “psychosocial”; this is likely due 
to the proliferation of objects like questionnaires, and mental 
health care documentation in notes that are unrelated to 
suicidality. 
TABLE I 
TOP 30 FEATURE WORDS 
flag 
overdose 
coordinator 
took 
spc 
observation 
called 
warning 
pills 
prf 
unknown 
interrupted 
gun 
placement 
lcsw 
lethal 
outcome 
reportedly 
notified 
sdv 
occurred 
police 
protocol 
od 
supports 
seeking 
category 
preparatory 
cut 
determined 
 
A. ZSL DNN and Baseline DNN Performance 
The classifications by the clinicians and the probabilities 
assigned by the ZSL DNN and the Baseline DNN were first 
assessed by AUC score. The results are in Table II and Figure 
4. 
 
TABLE II 
AUC PERFORMANCE 
ZSL DNN 
Baseline DNN 
0.946 
0.47 
 
 
Figure 4. ZSL DNN AUC results (left), Baseline DNN AUC results (right) 
 
In terms of AUC, the ZSL DNN trained through mapping the 
semantic space to the feature space outperformed the Baseline 
DNN trained with the bigram bag-of-words features.  
The sensitivity, specificity, and PPV results at 0.15, 0.5, and 
0.85 probability thresholds for each DNN are in Tables III-V.  
Probability refers to the probability the DNN assigned to each 
note for positive suicidality documentation. We applied the 
median probability (0.1499, rounded) assigned by the ZSL 
DNN to the testSet2 documents (the test set containing random 
notes associated with irrelevant ICD-10-CM codes) in forming 
minimum and maximum thresholds; 0.5 is a standard midpoint 
probability threshold. The combined scores in these tables were 
computed with all true positives, true negatives, false positives, 
and false negatives for both test sets, for the indicated metrics.  
Values of NaN (not a number) occurred where there were no 
true positives or false positives. 
 
TABLE III 
EVALUATION RESULTS AT 0.15 PROBABILITY THRESHOLD 
ZSL DNN 
Sensitivity/Recall  
Specificity 
Precision/PPV 
testSet1 
97% 
100% 
91% 
testSet2 
100% 
64% 
05% 
Combined 
97% 
59% 
67% 
Baseline DNN 
 
 
 
testSet1 
99% 
0% 
90% 
testSet2 
50% 
09% 
01% 
Combined 
98% 
08% 
48% 
 
TABLE IV 
EVALUATION RESULTS AT 0.5 PROBABILITY THRESHOLD 
ZSL DNN 
Sensitivity/Recall  
Specificity 
Precision/PPV 
testSet1 
92% 
40% 
93% 
testSet2 
50% 
97% 
25% 
Combined 
91% 
92% 
90% 
Baseline DNN 
 
 
 
testSet1 
92% 
0% 
89% 
testSet2 
50% 
10% 
1% 
Combined 
91% 
9% 
46% 
 
TABLE V 
EVALUATION RESULTS AT 0.85 PROBABILITY THRESHOLD 
ZSL DNN 
Sensitivity/Recall  
Specificity 
Precision/PPV 
testSet1 
77% 
70% 
96% 
testSet2 
50% 
100% 
100% 
Combined 
76% 
97% 
96% 
Baseline DNN 
 
 
 
testSet1 
0% 
100% 
NaN/div by 0 
testSet2 
0% 
100% 
NaN/div by 0 
Combined 
0% 
100% 
NaN/div by 0 
 
The ZSL DNN outperformed the Baseline DNN in most 
metrics at all probability thresholds.   
B. Second Evaluation 
To explore how this new methodology can identify clinical 
notes documenting suicidality that are not associated with a 
relevant ICD-10-CM code with high precision, the clinicians 
also reviewed the 16 notes from testSet2 containing the base 
string “suicid’ that received a probability at or above 0.90 from 
the trained ZSL DNN. The clinicians noted suicide ideation or 
attempt, and the presence of the following suicide risk factors, 
based on National Institute of Mental Health guidelines [45]: 
 Depression and other mental health disorders 
 Substance abuse disorder 
 Family history of a mental health or substance abuse 
disorder 
 Family history of suicide 
 Family violence, including physical or sexual abuse 
 Having guns or other firearms in the home 
 Being in prison or jail 
 Being exposed to others’ suicidal behavior 
Of these 16 clinical notes (associated with 16 different 
patients), 7 documented current or past suicide ideation or 
attempt.  Eight of the remaining notes included one or more 
risk factors for suicide (nearly all included multiple risk 
factors). In all, 15 of the 16 notes contained documentation of 
current or past suicide ideation or attempt, and/or suicide risk 

 
 
6
factors, for patients who had never received a suicidality ICD-
10-CM code diagnosis during the study period, achieving a 
PPV of 93.8%. 
IV. DISCUSSION 
Regarding the study’s original questions, our ZSL approach 
effectively identified suicidality in all types of clinical notes, 
surpassing the performance of the bag-of-words baseline in 
conjunction with deep learning. It also effectively identified 
suicidality or suicide risk documentation from among clinical 
notes not associated with a relevant ICD-10-CM code with high 
precision, on probability threshold. 
A. Semantic Space 
In this work, the semantic space development is framed as  
feature extraction where mapping is enhanced by attaching 
weights to features found in the data, an approach also used in 
computer vision ZSL [46]. The semantic space captures natural 
data properties by identifying salient terms and relevant 
contextual 
terms 
in 
collective 
clinical 
suicidality 
documentation (i.e., a corpus of notes associated with relevant 
ICD codes). Table 1 lists 30 prominent feature words associated 
with collective suicidality documentation after removing terms 
associated with other kinds of documents. There is an intuitive 
sense to these words; “flag” is found in the phrase “high risk for 
suicide flag”; “overdose” and “cut” refer to suicide methods; 
“pills” and “gun” refer to suicide instruments. Identifying terms 
contextually similar to these provides patterns in relevant 
documentation.  Again, this has an intuitive logic. The most 
contextually similar terms to “flag” include “reactivate” and 
“deactivate” (for a high suicide risk flag) and “high” (the level 
of risk).  The most contextually similar terms to “pills” include 
“handful”, “fistfuls”, and “bunch”, implying large quantities, 
along with “overdosing” and “took”, the associated actions.  
The feature word  “spc” indicates VA’s suicide prevention 
coordinators, which is a structural change that VA implemented 
for suicide prevention [10]. Concordantly, “police” and “lcsw” 
(i.e., licensed clinical social worker) refer to other professions 
highly associated with individuals at risk for suicide. For 
example, police may be activated for a rescue, and a licensed 
clinical social worker may be involved in treatment planning or 
referral connections for suicidal individuals. The feature words 
“prf” and “sdv” refer to “patient record flag” and “self-directed 
violence”, respectively.  The semantic space provided an 
efficient representation for effective mapping to the feature 
space.   
B. Data Retrieval and Model Training 
Using associated structured data elements like ICD-10-CM 
codes, and a base string provides a means to locate equally sized 
corpora for training that could be generically labeled “0” or “1”.  
These labels were primarily based on a structured data 
association, since their individual unstructured content was 
mostly unknown. This approach solves the issue of imbalanced 
training data. The predominant clinical note types (Appendix) 
also illustrate this.  Most of the frequent note types associated 
with one of the relevant CDC ICD-10-CM codes and containing 
the base string are relevant to suicidality.  Addendum is a 
common note type [47] associated with many domains [48]. 
The most frequent note types not associated with a relevant 
code resemble frequencies of all note types in the VA [47].  
C. Identifying Suicidality Documentation 
To our knowledge, this method has not been applied in other 
studies.  Unlike VA surveillance methods using structured data, 
it also leverages information found in EHR notes. Also, unlike 
other NLP methods [18, 20, 21, 23, 24, 26, 29, 30] it can be 
applied to all patients and note types.  In other studies, a bag-
of-words approach has been applied to suicidality identification 
and other machine learning tasks [21, 49, 50].  However, the 
results of this current study suggest that the complexity of 
suicidality documentation demands a more targeted approach.   
This method could complement existing measures like 
SPAN, alerting suicide prevention coordinators of additional 
patients at risk.  The results of the two clinical psychologists’ 
evaluations demonstrate the method’s efficiency in identifying 
suicidality documentation for documents where there is no 
relevant ICD-10-CM code. The performance on both test sets 
demonstrates the methodology’s effectiveness in classifying 
notes that are mixed in terms of ICD-10-CM coding. 
Tables III - V suggest that the probability threshold can be 
adjusted to suit a specific task like finding suicidality and its 
risk factors with high precision among notes not associated with 
a relevant ICD-10-CM code. This is especially true considering 
the small prevalence of suicidality documentation in clinical 
notes.  The second evaluation (which yielded 93.8% PPV) 
demonstrates this.  By applying a high probability threshold of 
0.90 to all 5000 testSet2 documents and focusing on clinical 
notes containing the base string, of the 16 documents (for 16 
different patients), 94% contained suicidality and/or suicidality 
risk factor documentation, based on clinician review. These 
results exceed those of Cusick et al.’s [26] similar task, where 
87% of notes were correctly classified, among notes for patients 
diagnosed with depression or prescribed an antidepressant.  In 
this current study’s second evaluation, none of the 16 patients 
identified had ever received a suicide ICD-10-CM code during 
the study’s time period.  It is impossible to know if the patients 
in the 8 notes simply containing documented risk factors were 
suicidal or not based solely on electronic health records. 
Suicidal patients sometimes deny suicide ideation or attempt 
[16, 51].  For example, in one note from the chart review 
associated with a relevant ICD-10-CM code, the patient 
reportedly denied suicide ideation, even after checking into the 
hospital hours earlier for a self-reported suicide attempt. 
D. Future Work 
 This work is part of a larger study of patients at risk for 
suicide.[52] The next step is to combine these findings with 
prior work. We also plan an analysis of patients from first 
suicide ideation or attempt documented in the VA system, to 
understand their evolution of care. 
E. Limitations 
VHA data largely cover a population of older men. However, 
the amount of women and younger patients is increasing, thus 

 
 
7
also increasing the generalizability of these findings. The 
corpora retrieval method we used to train the ZSL DNN is 
dependent on clinicians’ use of the relevant ICD-10-CM codes 
in documenting care, which may be prone to underuse [8]. 
However, the results of this study indicate the method’s utility. 
Due to environmental computational limitations, we randomly 
selected 20,000 notes from the stringAndDx corpus, and 20,000 
notes from the noDx corpus for training the ZSL DNN.  
V. CONCLUSION 
We developed a new methodology to identify suicidality in 
clinical notes using zero-shot learning (ZSL). A trained ZSL 
deep neural network (DNN) outperformed a DNN trained using 
a baseline bag-of-words method in AUC scores and other 
metrics assessed at various probability thresholds on unseen 
data, according to expert review. This novel methodology 
identifies suicidality and its risk factors with high precision, 
when applying a 0.90 probability threshold, in VA clinical notes 
not associated with a relevant ICD-10-CM code.  This 
methodology 
could 
complement 
existing 
suicidality 
identification measures. These findings hold promise for future 
research. 
APPENDIX 
 
Most Frequent Note Types in Training Data by Corpus 
stringAndDx 
noDx 
Note Type 
Count 
Note Type 
Count 
Addendum 
2844 
Addendum 
5683 
Suicide Behavior 
and Report 
843 
Primary Care Secure 
Messaging 
291 
Suicide Prevention 
Telephone Note 
811 
Nursing Note 
228 
Suicide Behavior 
and Overdose 
Report 
613 
Administrative Note 
207 
Suicide Prevention 
Note 
452 
State Prescription 
Drug Monitoring 
Program 
110 
Suicide Prevention 
Safety Plan 
448 
Care Flow Sheet 
88 
Mental Health 
Nursing 
Assessment Note 
374 
Telephone Contact 
75 
Veterans Crisis 
Line Note 
222 
Mental Health 
Diagnostic Study 
Note 
71 
Social Work Note 
213 
Non VA Care 
Consult Result Note 
69 
Suicide Prevention 
Contact 
212 
Operation Report 
64 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The views expressed are those of the authors and do not 
necessarily reflect those of the Department of Veterans Affairs, 
the United States Government, or the academic affiliate 
institutions. This work was funded by Veterans Affairs Health 
Services Research and Development Services grant IIR 18-035 
Understanding Suicide Risks among LGBT Veterans in VA 
Care, and NIH National Center for Advancing Translational 
Sciences grant UL1TR001876.
