arXiv:1402.1956v1  [cs.AI]  9 Feb 2014
Revisiting the Learned Clauses Database
Reduction Strategies
Said Jabbour and Jerry Lonlac and Lakhdar Sais and Yakoub Salhi
CRIL - CNRS, Universit´e d’Artois, Lens, France

Abstract. In this paper, we revisit an important issue of CDCL-based
SAT solvers, namely the learned clauses database management policies.
Our motivation takes its source from a simple observation on the remark-
able performances of both random and size-bounded reduction strategies.
We ﬁrst derive a simple reduction strategy, called Size-Bounded Random-
ized strategy (in short SBR), that combines maintaing short clauses (of
size bounded by k), while deleting randomly clauses of size greater than
k. The resulting strategy outperform the state-of-the-art, namely the
LBD based one, on SAT instances taken from the last SAT competition.
Reinforced by the interest of keeping short clauses, we propose several
new dynamic variants, and we discuss their performances.
1
Introduction
Today, SAT has gained a considerable audience with the advent of a new gen-
eration of solvers able to solve large instances encoding real-world problems.
These solvers, often called modern SAT solvers [22,11], are based on the classi-
cal DPLL procedure [9] enhanced with: (i) an eﬃcient implementation of unit
propagation through incremental and lazy data structures, (ii) restart policies
[15,20], (iii) activity-based variable selection heuristics (VSIDS-like) [22], and
(iv) clause learning [27,22]. Clause learning is now recognized as one of the most
important component of Modern SAT solvers. The main idea is that when a
current branch of the search tree leads to a conﬂict, clause learning aims to de-
rive a clause that succinctly expresses the causes of the conﬂict. Such learned
clause is then used to prune the search space. Clause learning also known in the
literature as Conﬂict Driven Clause Learning (CDCL) refers now to the most
known and used First UIP learning scheme, ﬁrst integrated in the SAT solver
Grasp [27] and eﬃciently implemented in zChaﬀ[22]. Most of the SAT solvers,
integrate this strong learning scheme. Theoretically, by integrating clause learn-
ing to DPLL-like procedures [9], the obtained SAT solver formulated as a proof
system is as powerful as general resolution [24,26].
In practice, the eﬃciency of CDCL-based SAT solvers heavily depends on the
strategy used to manage the learned clauses database. Indeed, as at each conﬂict,
a new clause is added to the learned clauses database, its size grows exponen-
tially. To avoid this combinatorial explosion, several learned clauses database

management strategies have been proposed (e.g. [22,11,1,3,16]). These strate-
gies aims to maintain a learned clause database of reasonable size by eliminating
clauses deemed irrelevant to the subsequent search. All these management strate-
gies follow a predeﬁned cleaning time-sequence where the interval between two
successive reduction steps is more or less important. At each conﬂict, an activity
is associated to the learned clause (static strategy). Such heuristic-based activity
aims to weight each clause according to its relevance to the search process. In
the case of dynamic strategies, such clauses activities are dynamically updated.
The reduction of the learned clauses database consists in eliminating inactive
or irrelevant clauses. Even if all the proposed learned clause deletion strategies
are shown to be empirically eﬃcient, determining the most relevant clause to
the search process remains a challenging task. It is important to note that the
eﬃciency of most of the state-of-the-art learned clauses management strategies
heavily depends on the cleaning frequency and on the amount of clauses to be
deleted each time.
Diﬀerent implementations of SAT solvers are proposed each year to the
SAT competition, they include several enhancements to the main components
of CDCL-based solvers. The SAT competitions, races and challenges stimulate
the development of eﬃcient implementations. However, such a race to the most
eﬃcient implementation has led to increasingly complex solvers with several
number of parameters. Such parameters are either static (ﬁxed before search),
or dynamic, their values are conditionally set during search by observing the
search behavior. These sophisticated implementations increase the diﬃculty to
understand what is essential from what is not. In [19], an empirical analysis
focusing on the principal techniques that have contributed to the impressive
performance of modern SAT solvers has been conducted. This is really a ﬁrst
step towards a deep understanding of modern SAT solvers.
In this paper, we revisit an important issue of CDCL-based SAT solvers,
namely the learned clauses database management policy. It is important to note
at this point that considering short clauses as the most relevant ones (size-
bounded based reduction strategies) have been proposed since 1996 by Marques
Silva and Sakallah (Grasp [27]) and Bayardo and Schrag (RelSAT [6]). Most
of the state-of-the-art SAT solvers maintain systematically only binary clauses,
while for clauses of size greater that two, several sophisticated relevance based
measures have been proposed to predict the most relevant ones.
Our motivation in this work has its source from a simple observation on the
remarkable performances of size-bounded reduction strategies. From this ﬁrst
results, we decided to investigate other ”naive” strategies such as random and
FIFO (First In First Out). The goal is to quantify the performance gap be-
tween these simple strategies and those implemented in the state-of-the-art SAT
solvers. Secondly, we derive a simple reduction strategy, called Size-Bounded
Randomized Strategy (in short SBR), that combines maintaing short clauses (of
size bounded by k), while deleting randomly clauses of size greater than k. Rein-
forced by the interest of keeping short clauses, we propose several new dynamic
measures that allow us to quantify the relevance of a given learned clause w.r.t.

the current state of the search process. Intuitively, a short learned clause with
literals assigned most often at the top of the current branch of the search tree
is considered more relevant. Several relevance-based strategies are then derived,
allowing us to keep learned clauses that are more likely to cut branches at the
top of the search tree. All these strategies are integrated at the top of MiniSAT
2.2 and compared with the state-of-the-art SAT solvers on application instances
taken from the last SAT competition. To conﬁrm the superiority of size-based
measures against LBD-based ones, we also present the results obtained by sub-
stituting LBD with dynamic size-based activity inside Glucose 3.0. The obtained
results bring up to date old strategies, such as size-bounded proposed more than
ﬁfteenth years ago [27,5,6] (see Section 2 - Related Works). These results are not
surprising, since short clauses are usually preferred for their ability to reduce
further the search space. This is also why all the SAT solvers keep the learned
binary clauses.
The paper is organized as follows. We ﬁrst recall related works in Section 2.
Then, after some technical background and preliminary deﬁnitions (Section 3),
we motivate our study by investigating the size-bounded, random and FIFO
deletion strategies in Section 4. In Section 5, we present our ﬁrst reduction
strategy, called Size-Bounded Randomized strategy. In Section 6, we describe
several relevant based deletion strategies, that allow us to keep learned clauses
that are more likely to cut branches at the top of the search tree. All these
new strategies are integrated at the top of MiniSAT 2.2 and compared to the
state-of-the-art SAT solvers Glucose 3.0 and Lingeling 2013. We also present
the results obtained by integrating size-bounded based strategies inside Glucose
3.0. A discussion is provided in Section 7, before concluding.
2
Related Works
In this section, we give a non exhaustive review of some important deletion
strategies as described by the authors. To our knowledge, maintaing a relevant
set of clauses goes back to the developments of eﬃcient resolution-based proof
procedures in automated theorem proving. In [12], D. Gelperin proposed diﬀerent
strategies that attempt to determine the satisﬁability of a set of input clauses
while at the same time minimizing the cardinality of the set of retained clauses.
In constraint satisfaction and propositional satisﬁability problems, to over-
come the overhead of unrestricted learning, several strategies have been proposed
by Bayardo et al. [6,5], including size-bounded and relevance-bounded learnings.
They deﬁned size-bounded (respectively, relevance-bounded) learning of order i,
which retains indeﬁnitely only clauses derived reasons containing i or fewer vari-
ables (respectively, maintains any reason that contains at most i variables whose
assignments have changed since the reason was derived). In SAT, this issue is
ﬁrst investigated in GRASP by Joao Marques Silva et al. [27]. Indeed, in order
to guarantee the worst case growth of the clause database to be polynomial in
the number of variables, in [27] the authors propose a selective strategy on the
clauses that have to be added to the clause database. More precisely, given an

integer parameter k, conﬂict-induced clauses whose size (number of literals) is
less than k are marked green (added to the database) while those of size greater
than k are marked red and kept around only while they are unit clauses, i.e., a
red clause is deleted when it contains more than one free (unassigned) literal.
Like many other solvers, Chaﬀ[22] supports the deletion of added conﬂict
clauses to avoid a memory explosion. Essentially, Chaﬀuses scheduled lazy clause
deletion. When each clause is added, it is analyzed to determine at what point in
the future, if any, the clause should be deleted. The metric used is relevance, such
that when more than n (where n is typically 100-200) literals in the clause will
become unassigned for the ﬁrst time, the clause will be marked as deleted. The
actual memory associated with deleted clauses is recovered with an infrequent
monolithic database compaction step.
In Berkmin [14], the authors consider that more recently deduced clauses are
more valuable because it took more time to deduce them from the original set
of clauses. The learned clause database is considered as a queue (First In First
Out). The Berkmin deletion strategy maintains short clauses (size less than 8)
combined with queue representation of the learned clauses database.
MiniSat [11] aggressively deletes learned clauses based on an activity heuristic
similar to the one for variables. A learnt clause is considered as irrelevant if its
activity or its involvement in recent conﬂict analysis is marginal [11]. The limit
on how many learned clauses are allowed is increased after each restart. This
strategy has been improved in MiniSAT 2.2.
More recently, Audemard and Simon [1], use the number of diﬀerent levels
(LBD - Literal Block Distance) involved in a given learnt clause to quantify the
quality of learnt clauses. The set of diﬀerent levels present in a learned clause
has been used in [2] to prove the optimality of the First UIP scheme. In [1],
clauses with smaller LBD are considered as more relevant. The LBD measure is
integrated in MiniSAT solver leading to Glucose, one of the state-of-the-art SAT
solvers. LBD based measure is also exploited in Lingeling [7], SAT13 [21] the
CDCL-based SAT solver designed by D. Knuth, and some other SAT solvers en-
tering the last SAT competition 2013 (e.g. gluebit clasp 1.0, BreakIDGlucose 1,
glueminisat 2.2.7j). Another dynamic management policy of the learnt clauses
database is proposed in [3]. It is based on a dynamic freezing and activation
principle of the learnt clauses. At a given search state, using a relevant selection
function based on progress saving [23], it activates the most promising learned
clauses while freezing irrelevant ones.
In [16], we proposed two new measures to predict the quality of learned
clauses. The ﬁrst one is based on the backtracking level (BTL), while the second
is based on a notion of distance, deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the maximum
and minimum assignment levels of the literals involved in the learned clause.
Finally, size-bounded clause sharing strategies are also considered in several
portfolio and divide and conquer based parallel SAT solvers (e.g. ManySAT [17]
and PMSat [13]).

3
Technical Background and Preliminary Deﬁnitions
A propositional formula F in Conjunctive Normal Form (CNF) is a conjunction
of clauses, where a clause is a disjunction of literals. A literal is a positive (x)
or negated (¬x) propositional variable. The two literals x and ¬x are called
complementary. Let c be a clause, |c| denotes the size of c (its number of literals).
A unit clause is a clause containing only one literal (called unit literal), while
a binary clause contains exactly two literals. An empty clause, denoted ⊥, is
interpreted as false (unsatisﬁable), whereas an empty CNF formula, denoted ⊤, is
interpreted as true (satisﬁable). The set of variables occurring in F is denoted VF.
An interpretation ρ of a propositional formula F is a function which associates
a value ρ(x) ∈{false, true} to some of the variables x ∈VF. ρ is complete
if it assigns a value to every x ∈VF, and partial otherwise. An interpretation
ρ is alternatively represented by a set of literals, i.e., ρ = S
x∈VF f(x), where
f(x) = x (respectively f(x) = ¬x), if ρ(x) = true (respectively ρ(x) = false).
A model of a formula F is an interpretation ρ that satisﬁes the formula.
Let us now introduce some notations and terminology on SAT solvers based
on the Davis Logemann Loveland procedure, commonly called DPLL [9]. DPLL
is a backtrack search procedure; at each node the assigned literals (decision lit-
eral and the propagated ones) are labeled with the same decision level starting
from 1 and increased at each branching. The current decision level is the high-
est decision level in the assignment stack. When a conﬂict is encountered After
backtracking, some variables are unassigned, and the current decision level is
decreased accordingly. At level i, the current partial assignment ρ can be repre-
sented as a sequence of decision-propagation of the form ⟨(xi
k), xi
k1, xi
k2, . . . , xi
knk ⟩
where the ﬁrst literal xi
k corresponds to the decision literal xk assigned at level
i and xi
kj for 1 ⩽j ⩽nk represent (unit) literals propagated at level i. Such a
partial interpretation (sequence of decision-propagations) associated to a given
node of the search tree is called a partial ordered interpretation. Let x ∈ρ, we
denote by lev(x, ρ) the assignment level of x in ρ. Let ρ be a partial interpreta-
tion, and c a clause, we deﬁne ci as the projection of c to the literals of c assigned
at level i, i.e., ci = {x|lev(x, ρ) = i}. This set is called a block in [1].
A conﬂict driven clause learning (CDCL) SAT solver explore the search space
by making successively a sequence of decision/propagation. When a conﬂict is
encountered a conﬂict clause is derived by resolution on the clauses involved in
the unit propagation process (encoded as an implication graph). Such learned
conﬂict clause is then added to the learned clauses database. It allows us to
produce a unit (asserting) literal at an earlier level. Then, the CDCL-based SAT
solver backtracks to that level, propagates the asserting literal and repeats the
sequence of decision/propagation until a model is found or an empty clause is
derived. The search regularly restarts, and the learned clauses database is regu-
larly reduced by eliminating irrelevant clauses. These diﬀerent components are
interrelated. For example, the restart have strong eﬀect on the learning compo-
nent [18,8,25,24,17,4]. Some of the state-of-the-art SAT solvers such as Glucose
use aggressive restart, very helpful for solving unsatisﬁable SAT instances.

4
Size, Random and FIFO Based Deletion Strategies
As mentioned in the introduction, our main aim is to ﬁrst quantify the perfor-
mance gap between the state of the art learned clause deletion strategies and
some basic strategies including random deletion based one. In this section, we il-
lustrate the performance of size, random and FIFO deletion strategies. All these
static strategies are integrated without any other modiﬁcation to MiniSAT 2.2.
The three new versions of MiniSAT are obtained as follows:
– Size-MiniSAT : at each conﬂict, the activity of the learned clause c is set
to |c|, i.e,. A(c) = |c|
– Rand-MiniSAT : at each conﬂict, the activity of the learned clause c is set
to random real value w ∈[0..1], i.e., A(c) = drand(random seed). We used
exactly the random function of MiniSAT with the same random seed to allow
reproducible results.
– FIFO-MiniSAT : In this version, the learned clauses are managed using a
queue. Each time a reduction is performed, the oldest clauses are deleted.
Solvers
#Solved (#SAT - #UNSAT) Average Time
MiniSAT
201 (122 - 79)
956.78s
Glucose
216 (104 - 112)
807.62s
Lingeling
233 (119 - 114)
1090.99s
Size-MiniSAT
220 (126 - 94)
1226.27s
Rand-MiniSAT
191 (121 - 70)
1071.05s
FIFO-MiniSAT
173 (119 - 54)
862.50s
Table 1. A Comparative Evaluation of Size/Rand/FIFO-MiniSAT
For all the deletion strategies deﬁned in this paper, clauses with smaller ac-
tivities are considered more relevant. For the deletion frequency and the amount
of deleted clauses, we follow the same strategy implemented in MiniSAT 2.2. For
all the experiments presented in this paper, we run the SAT solvers on the 300
application instances taken from SAT competition 2013. All the instances are
preprocessed by SatElite[10] before running the SAT solver. We used Intel Xeon
quad-core machines with 32GB of RAM running at 2.66 Ghz. For each instance,
we used a timeout of 5000 seconds of CPU time.
In Table 1, we give the comparative experimental evaluation of our three
version of MiniSAT with Glucose 3.0 and Lingeling 2013 the best solvers of
the SAT competition 2013 (application category). In the second column, we give
the total number of solved instances (#Solved). We also mention, the number of
instances proven satisﬁable (#SAT) and unsatisﬁable (#UNSAT) in parenthesis.
The third column show the average CPU time in seconds (total time on solved
instances divided by the number of solved instances).

From this ﬁrst experiment, the state-of-the-art SAT solvers Lingeling 2013
and Glucose 3.0 solve 233 and 216 instances respectively. The solver MiniSAT
solve 201 instances. Let us comment on the performance of the other versions
of MiniSAT without any other enhancement. The Size-MiniSAT solver is able
to solve 220 instances (4 more instance than Glucose 3.0). Looking at the av-
erage CPU time, Glucose 3.0 performs better. Other important observation can
be drawn from this ﬁrst experiment. On satisﬁable instances Size-MiniSAT
performs better than all the other solvers. It solves 126 instances. The last re-
mark that can be drawn, Rand-MiniSAT solves more satisﬁable instances (121)
than the state-of-the-art solvers Glucose 3.0 and Lingeling 2013. Finally FIFO-
MiniSAT is clearly the worst, particularly on unsatisﬁable instances (only 54
instances are solved). However, it remains competitive on satisﬁable instances
and solves 15 instances more than Glucose 3.0.
5
Size-Bounded Randomized Strategy
The remarquable results obtained in Section 4 by Size-MiniSAT , where short
clauses are considered relevant is clearly encouraging. In this section, we propose
a new simple reduction strategy, called Size-Bounded Randomized strategy (in
short SBR), that combines maintaing short clauses (of size bounded by k), while
deleting randomly clauses of size greater than k. One of the main drawback of
the clause-size based activity, is that larger clauses are often considered irrel-
evant. On some hard problems, such drastic selection of learned short clauses
might have negative eﬀects. To overcome this problem, we introduced some ran-
domization to the size based approach. More precisely, SBR strategy is deﬁned
as follows: given a upper bound k on the length of the learned clauses, each time
a learned clause c is derived, if its size is less than k then A(c) = |c|, otherwise
A(c) = k + drand(random seed). In other words, we still prefer short clauses,
while for clauses of size larger than k, they are considered of equal size k with an
additional random value. In this way, larger clauses can be selected randomly.
The solver SBR(k)-MiniSAT (where k is the upper bound size) implements
the above described strategy. To determine the best upper bound size k, we run
SBR(k)-MiniSAT with k = 2, 5, 10, 12 and 15.
The results are depicted in Table 2. SBR(12)-MiniSAT obtains the best
performances. It solves 236 instances, 3 instance more than Lingeling 2013 and
20 instances more than Glucose 3.0. These remarquable results, bring up to
date, old strategies such as size-bounded strategies proposed more than ﬁfteenth
years ago [27,5,6]. The results also show that adding some randomization to allow
selecting clauses of larger size allows us to introduce some diversiﬁcation to the
resolution derivation of CDCL-Based SAT solvers. It is important to note that
our proposed implementation can be obtained by adding three lines of codes
to MiniSAT 2.2 without any tuning or additional enhancements. It is worth
noticing that the solvers SBR(k)-MiniSAT , for k = 5, 10, 12, 15, outperform
the solver Glucose 3.0.

Solvers
#Solved (#SAT - #UNSAT) Average Time
Glucose 3.0
216 (104 - 112)
807.62s
Lingeling 2013
233 ( 119 - 114)
1090.99s
SBR(2)-MiniSAT
196 (122 - 74)
1064.17s
SBR(5)-MiniSAT
218 (118 - 100)
1213.36s
SBR(10)-MiniSAT
231 (124 - 107)
1158.25s
SBR(12)-MiniSAT
236 (128 - 108)
1266.53s
SBR(15)-MiniSAT
228 (120 - 108)
1226.96s
Table 2. A Comparative Evaluation of SBR(k)-MiniSAT
6
Towards Relevant-Based Deletion Strategies
Reinforced by the interest of keeping short clauses, our goal in this section is
to show if some other variants of these size-based strategies, can lead to better
performance. More precisely, our aim is to design dynamic deletions strategies,
where the activities of the learned clauses are updated during search. In most of
the state-of-the-art SAT solvers, the activities of the learned clauses are updated
dynamically.
6.1
Clause Relevance-Based Dynamic Measures
Let us explain the idea that has guided us in the design of these new dynamic
variants. Intuitively, a short learned clause with literals assigned most often at
the top of the current branch of the search tree is considered more relevant.
Given a partial interpretation ρ and c a clause from the learned clause
database. Our ﬁrst dynamic size based deletion strategy is deﬁned as follows:
the initial activity of c is set to |c|. Suppose now that l ∈ρ is assigned by unit
propagation at level d, thanks to the learnt clause c. In this case, the new activity
of c is set to d if d < |c|. This measure allows us to keep learned clauses that
are more likely to cut branches at the top of the search tree. For example, for
two clauses of equal size, we prefer those containing literals assigned at the top
of the search tree. By integrating this measure to MiniSAT 2.2, we obtain our
ﬁrst variant SizeD-MiniSAT .
Following the same idea, we propose a second version Size(k)D-MiniSAT .
The goal is to introduce a threshold k on the length of the clauses, in order to
update only the activity of clauses greater than k, and keeping the activity of
short clauses (size less than k) static. More precisely, the initial activity of c is
set as follows: if |c| ⩽k then A(c) = |c|, otherwise A(c) = k + |c|. Each time, a
learned clause c is the reason of a unit propagated literal at decision level d, its
activity is updated as follows: if k + d < A(c) then A(c) = k + d. In this way,
the activity of a clause with size less than k is not updated.
The third variant is deﬁned as follows. Let ρ be a partial interpretation
leading to a conﬂict at decision level d and c its associated learned clause. The
activity of c is initially set to A(c) = Pd
i=1 i × |ci|. During search, each time c is

the reason of a unit propagated literal, and if its new activity w.r.t. the current
interpretation is better, the activity of c is updated. A clause c is considered
better than a clause c′ if A(c) < A(c′). This new strategy leads us to the new
solver denoted RelD-MiniSAT .
Solvers
#Solved (#SAT - #UNSAT) Average Time
Glucose 3.0
216 (104 - 112)
807.62s
Lingeling 2013
233 (119 - 114)
1090.99s
Size(12)D-MiniSAT
233 (123 - 110)
1153.9s
SizeD-MiniSAT
231 (120 - 111)
1174.97s
RelD-MiniSAT
222 (122 - 100)
1157.31s
Table 3. A Comparative Evaluation of Dynamic Strategies
In Table 3, we present the comparative results of the three new dynamic rel-
evant based deletions strategies. As we can see, Lingeling 2013 and Size(12)D-
MiniSAT present comparable performances (233 solved instances). We also
observe that Lingeling 2013 is better (respectively worse) than Size(12)D-
MiniSAT on unsatisﬁable (respectively satisﬁable) instances. The solver Min-
iSAT integrating our three relevant based deletion strategies outperforms the
solver Glucose 2013.
In this section, three dynamic strategies are proposed where the activities of
the learned clauses are updated dynamically during search. As a summary, size-
bounded randomized strategy SBR(12)-MiniSAT remains the best, as it solves
more instances (236 solved instances) than all the proposed strategies proposed
in this paper including the state-of-the-art SAT solvers Lingeling 2013 and
Glucose 3.0.
All the proposed strategies can be easily integrated to MiniSAT using few
lines of codes.
6.2
Substituting LBD with Clause Size Inside Glucose
In the previous sections, we compared our deletion strategies integrated in Min-
iSAT with the state-of-the-art SAT solvers Glucose 3.0 and Lingeling 2013.
These two solvers exploit LBD based measure for managing the learned clauses
database. The question that we want to answer is the following: what about
substituting LBD measure with clause size inside Glucose 3.0 and Lingeling
2013? As these two solvers exploit LBD based measure for managing the learned
clauses database, we only modify Glucose 3.0 to evaluate the eﬀect of substi-
tuting LBD with dynamic clause size (Size(k)D) presented in Section 6.1. The
obtained SAT solver is called Size(k)D-Glucose 3.0, where k is a clause size
threshold. This new solver is obtained by substituting LBD with Size in the two
following parts of Glucose 3.0:

– Initial learned clause activity: when a learned clause c is derived, its activity
is set as follows: A(c) = |c| if |c| < k, otherwise A(c) = k + |c|.
– Dynamic update of clause activity: at each conﬂict, the activity of the learned
clauses involved in the derivation of the asserting clause is updated as follows:
Let d be the conﬂict decision level. if k + d < A(c) then A(c) = k + d.
Obviously, the activity of a clause of size less than k is not updated.
The SBR(k)-Glucose 3.0 integrates size-bounded randomized deletion strat-
egy. It is obtained as follows: each time a learned clause c is derived, it receives
A(c) = |c| if |c| ⩽k, otherwise A(c) = k + irand(random seed, |VF|), where
irand(random seed, |VF|) return a number between 0 and |VF|. This activity
remains unchanged during search.
Solvers
#Solved (#SAT - #UNSAT) Average Time
Glucose 3.0
216 (104 - 112)
807.62s
Size(12)D-Glucose
224 (103 - 121)
919.16s
Size(15)D-Glucose
219 (100 - 119)
944.36s
SBR(15)-Glucose
222 (105 - 117)
1001.34s
Table
4. A Comparative Evaluation of Glucose, Size(k)D-Glucose and
SBR(k)-Glucose
This experiment demonstrates that the clause size is clearly more relevant
than LBD/glue measure. As we can see, from the result depicted in Table 4,
Size(12)D-Glucose 3.0 solves 8 instances more than Glucose 3.0. More interest-
ingly, on unsatisﬁable instances, our version solves 9 instances more than Glucose
3.0. On satisﬁable instances, both solvers present similar behavior. Glucose 3.0
solves only one additional instance. This experiment give us a deﬁnitive illustra-
tion that clause size based measure is better than LBD.
7
Discussion
As a summary, we demonstrate that the size of the clause remains the best
metric to quantify the usefulness of a given clause. The lesson that can be drawn
from this study, is that predicting the best clauses to be maintained during
search deserve further investigation. In our opinion, the performance of the LBD
measure can be explained by the fact that it is really related to the size of the
clauses. Indeed, we have 2 ⩽LBD(c) ⩽|c|. The clause size is an upper bound
of the LBD measure. For instance, the LBD of binary clauses is 2. Hence, the
strategy deﬁned in Glucose favors in some sens maintaining short clauses. In
[1], the authors mention that ”A good learning schema should add explicit links
between independent blocks of propagated (or decision) literals. If the solver stays
in the same search space, such a clause will probably help reducing the number of
next decision levels in the remaining computation”. The intuition given by the

authors, to understand the importance of clauses of LBD 2: ”the variable from
the last decision level will be glued with the block of literals propagated above.
We suspect all those clauses to be very important during search”. Let us discuss
these claims. First any learned clause add explicit links between independent
blocks of propagated literals. Secondly, any learned clause also help to prune the
search space and then to reduce the number of decision. The question we ask is
the following: let c1 = (x1 ∨x2 ∨x3) and c2 = (y1 ∨y2∨, . . . , ∨yn) with n > 3,
LBD(c1) = 3 and LBD(c2) = 2, which one is relevant? As you can guess, our
preference leans to the ﬁrst clause.
An important remark, all the strategies presented in this paper can be inte-
grated easily (few lines of code) to any CDCL-based SAT solver. A dedicated
web page including the proposed learned clauses database deletion strategies in-
tegrated to MiniSAT is currently under construction (http://www.cril.fr/∼sais).
8
Conclusion and Futur Works
In this paper, we addressed the learned clauses database management problem.
We demonstrated that size-bounded learning strategies proposed more than ﬁf-
teenth years ago [27,5,6] remains a good measure to predict the quality of learned
clauses. We have shown that adding randomization to size bounded learning is a
nice way to achieve controlled diversiﬁcation. It allows us to favor short clauses,
while maintaining a small fraction of large clauses necessary for deriving res-
olution proofs on some SAT instances. The experimental results, shows that
Size-Bounded Randomized strategy integrated to MiniSAT can achieve better
performance than the state-of-the-art SAT solvers. Convinced by the importance
of short clauses, we proposed several eﬃcient dynamic variant that aims to main-
tain short clauses containing literals that occurs more often at the top of the
search tree. Our last evaluation shows that substituting LBD with clause size
based measure inside Glucose leads to better performance on both SAT and UN-
SAT instances. This paper, open several perspectives including the reﬁnement
of the strategies proposed in this paper.
