HYPER HEURISTIC BASED ON GREAT DELUGE 
AND ITS VARIANTS FOR EXAM TIMETABLING 
PROBLEM 
Ei Shwe Sin1, Nang Saing Moon Kham2  
 
1University of Computer Studies, Yangon 

2 Head of Information Science Dept, University of Computer Studies, Yangon 

 
ABSTRACT 
Today, University Timetabling problems are occurred annually and they are often hard and 
time consuming to solve. This paper describes Hyper Heuristics (HH) method based on Great Deluge 
(GD) and its variants for solving large, highly constrained timetabling problems from different domains. 
Generally, in hyper heuristic framework, there are two main stages: heuristic selection and move 
acceptance. This paper emphasizes on the latter stage to develop Hyper Heuristic (HH) framework. The 
main contribution of this paper is that Great Deluge (GD) and its variants: Flex Deluge(FD), Non-
linear(NLGD), Extended Great Deluge(EGD) are used as move acceptance method in HH by combining 
Reinforcement learning (RL).These HH methods are tested on exam benchmark timetabling problem and 
best results and comparison analysis are reported. 
 
KEYWORDS 
Hyper Heuristic, Great Deluge, Exam Timetabling Problem 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Today, because of being critical in education sectors, most of the university administrators are 
trying   to get more enrolment of the student and they have to be very careful to increase in 
student’s stratifications. As a result, they are very careful to solve university problem. In fact, it 
represents the difficult optimization problem. As the difficulty of the problem, their importance 
in practice and inherent scientific challenge increases, they have been widely investigated across 
both the operational research and the artificial intelligence community. . It can be classified into 
exam timetabling problem and course timetabling problem. In this paper, exam timetabling 
problem (ETP) is used as the test bed for the proposed three HH methods.  
 
The exam timetabling problem is to assign a number of exams to a number of potential time 
periods or slots by taking into account to satisfy the several constraints. Several approaches 
have been conducted with various methodologies being applied to attempt to produce better 
quality exam timetables. There are a lot of researchers and their publications in the literature.  
For more detailed information about examination timetabling, it can be found in [2, 16, and 18].  
 
There are also varieties of timetabling problem classes on which variety of approaches such as 
sequential method, cluster methods, constraint-based methods and meta-heuristics are used. 
Moreover, there are a large number of Meta heuristics for solving an examination timetabling 
problem. However, these methods have some issues such as parameter tuning and they are not 
capable of dealing with other different problems. As a result, the current methods being applied 

to exam timetabling are hyper heuristic (HH). Hyper Heuristic is an emerged search technique 
for the purpose to raise the generality [7]. Early research works on hyper heuristic focused on 
the development of advanced strategies for choosing the heuristics to be applied at different 
points of the search [3]. Likewise, researchers have proposed different acceptance criteria to 
drive selection of low level heuristics within a hyper heuristic framework. For instance, a Monte 
Carlo acceptance criterion is used by Ayob and Kendall in [6] while the great deluge acceptance 
criterion is used by Kendall and Mohamad in [7]. Due to the success of the great deluge and its 
variants, in this paper, we use them as move acceptance method to find out whether they can 
support the good quality solutions for the Toronto benchmark exam timetabling problem or not.  
 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: the Section 2 reviews the previous methods that 
are related our proposed system while Section 3 describes the exam timetabling problem 
including constraints. In Section 4, the proposed move acceptance methods are presented. The 
experiment results and analysis are shown in the Section 5. Finally, the conclusion is shown at 
the Section 6. 
 
2. RELATED WORKS 
Normally, a hyper heuristic can conduct with a single point or multi-point search. There are two 
main stages in a single iteration of a hyper heuristic method .They are heuristic selection and 
movement acceptance. In this paper, the second stage is emphasized. In general, the movement 
acceptance can be deterministic or nondeterministic. There are many methods such as Great 
Deluge (GD), ACO algorithm and simulated annealing methods are used as move acceptance 
criteria in hyper heuristic because of their very popularities. Therefore, a brief review of GD and 
its variants is made in this paper.  
 
Bykov Y. proposed the time-predefined great deluge algorithm and Trajectory base search to 
exam timetabling in 2003 [19] and Edmund K. Burke and Yuri Bykov made an extension of the 
great deluge algorithm (which they called “Flex-Deluge”) where the acceptance of uphill moves 
depends on a “flexibility” coefficient, for solving exam timetabling problem in 2006 . Good 
results were presented and they suggested that the flex deluge method is relatively higher 
effective in the large-scale problems [8].  
 
 
In 2007, C. Pramodh and V. Ravi also proposed four variants of Modified Great Deluge 
Algorithm based Auto Associative Neural Network (MGDAAANN) and worked on three 
different banks data sets [4]. Likewise, Bilgin et al. also reported that a simple random-great 
deluge based hyper heuristic was the second best after choice function-simulated annealing, 
considering the average performance of all hyper heuristic over a set of examination timetabling 
problem[1]. For course timetabling problem, non linear great deluge algorithm (NLGD) was 
proposed by Landa Silva and Obit. That method produced new best in 4 out of 11 course 
timetabling problem instances of datasets [14]. In addition , McMullan proposed an extended 
great deluge algorithm(EGD) for university course timetabling , which allows re-heating similar 
to simulated annealing, and found new best results for the 5 medium instances. Moreover, in 
2009, the EGD algorithm is also investigated and made a comparison with the first winner, 
Tomas Muller in the 2nd International Timetabling Competition (ITC2007). And it seems that 
EGD is comparable to existing state of the art techniques, and form previous application to 
other data sets and a different problem domain (course timetabling)[3].  
 
 
In 2010, Nabil Nahas , Mustapha Nourelfath and Daoud Ait-Kadi have proposed the Iterated 
great Deluge heuristic to  implement for the dynamic facility layout problem(DFLP) . It consists 
of two main steps. The objective of the first step is to find a local optimum solution by EGD and 
the second step is a loop that allows the search process to alternate between diversification and 
intensification [18]. Likewise, in 2010, Ender Ozcan et al. proposed a hyper heuristic system by 

using reinforcement learning in heuristic selection and great deluge in move acceptance method 
and also achieved the comparative results with other HH methods in the literature [9]. By 
following this idea, we have already proposed to employ the Extended Great Deluge (EGD) as 
move acceptance method to make a decision whether to accept or reject a resultant solution in 
RL based HH framework. Therefore, from these well-known literature reviews and experiences, 
now, we would like to do another contribution by making comparison and more analysis about 
the GD and its other variants in HH framework. 
 
3. DESCRIPTION OF THE EXAM TIMETABLING PROBLEM 
The university exam timetabling problem can be defined and described in many ways. The basic 
way to represent to it is graph model .Mathematical model can also be used. In a more formal 
way, the timetabling literature defines two types of constraints. Hard Constraints are the 
constraints that must be satisfied at all times. Soft Constraints are not critical but their 
satisfaction is beneficial to students and/or the institution. Typically one cannot satisfy all soft 
constraints thus there is a need for a performance function measuring the degree of satisfaction 
of these constraints [3]. The primary hard and soft constraints in exam timetabling problem can 
be found in [2]. Among them, the following table shows the hard and soft constraints are used in 
this paper. 
Table 1.  Hard and Soft Constraints 
Constraints 
Description 
HC1 
No exams with common resources (e.g. students) 
assigned simultaneously. 
HC2 
Resources of exams need to be sufficient (i.e. size of 
exams need to be below the   room capacity, enough 
rooms for all of the exams.) 
HC3 
Each examination must be assigned to a timeslot only 
for once. 
HC4 
All the examinations must be scheduled. 
SC1 
A student should have at least a single timeslot in 
between his/her examinations in the same day. 
 
In addition, the problem can be defined with the terms shown in the table 2. 
 
Table 2.  Problem Description 
E 
the number of n exams: E1, E2,E3,… ,En 
S 
the number of m students:S1, S2, S3,…Sm; 
T 
the number of k timeslots: T1, T2, T3,….Tk; 
B n*k 
A binary matrix such that bik=1 when exam ei is assigned 
to the timeslot t € T and bik =0 otherwise. 

C=(cij)n*n 
The conflict matrix; where each element (denoted by cij 
where i, j) is the number of students that have to take 
both exams i and j. This is a symmetrical matrix of size 
N, where diagonal element cii equal the number of 
students who have taken exam i. 
 
In our system, we use not only the conflict matrix but also the binary matrix to ensure HC1 and 
HC3. The objective is to schedule all of the exams into time slots, while minimizing the average 
total cost per student. The following function is used to calculate the average cost per student. 
s
c
e
e
w
n
i
ij
j
i
i



1
|)
(|
 
 
    
           (1) 
In equation, wi is the weight that represents the importance of scheduling exams with common 
students i timeslots apart , where, w(1)=16, w(2)=8 w(3)=4,w(4)=2 and w(5)=1, i.e. the smaller 
the distance between periods the higher the weight allocated. Note for n>5, w (n) =0.  For 
example, if a student has two consecutive examinations (i.e. no free time between them) then 
the weight value of 16 is assigned. If a student has two consecutive exams with a free timeslot 
in between then a value 8 is assigned and so on. The value of cij is the number of students 
common to both examinations. The example of conflict matrix is presented in the following 
figure 1. In the figure , the value 3 of c11 means that there are 3 students who takes  the exam E1 
and the value 1 of c12 means that there is 1 conflict student who will take not only the exam E1 
but also exam E2. This conflict matrix is also symmetric. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Example of Conflict Matrix 
 
 
4. PROPOSED GD AND ITS VARIANTS FOR MOVE ACCEPTANCE IN HH 
METHODS 
By using reinforcement learning in the first stage of HH and the variants of GD are used as 
move acceptance method, the three hyper heuristic systems such as: RL_EGD, RL_NLGD and 
RL_FD are discussed in this section. Firstly, we present how to produce an initial solution and 
its representation and the low level heuristic which are used in these proposed systems. And 
then, the analysis and comparison of these three HH systems are described.  
 
 
E1 
E2 
E3 
E4 
E5 
E6 
E7 
E1 
3 
1 
2 
1 
2 
1 
1 
E2 
1 
3 
0 
1 
2 
2 
1 
E3 
2 
0 
2 
1 
1 
0 
1 
E4 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
0 
1 
E5 
2 
2 
1 
1 
3 
1 
0 
E6 
1 
2 
0 
0 
1 
2 
1 
E7 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
1 
2 

4.1. Low Level Heuristic and Initial Solution  
To get the final optimized solutions, it also totally depends on the set of heuristics it can be 
chosen from. Also, due to the performance changes of a number of heuristics over a search 
space, it is not easy to find a heuristic that always produces the best decisions. They are 
heuristics that allow movement through a solution space and that require domain knowledge and 
are problem dependent. Each heuristic creates its own heuristic search space that is part of the 
solution search space. There are many low level heuristics (LLH) in the literature, for example: 
mutational heuristic, ruin or recreate heuristic and so on. For low level heuristic module, the 
following table is presented the low level heuristics used in this paper. 
 
Table 3.  Low level Heuristics 
Low level Heuristic  
Description 
Largest Enrolment-(LE) 
This heuristic takes exams with the largest 
number 
of 
registered 
students 
and 
schedules them first. 
Swap Timeslot with Kempe Chain (ST-KC) Swapping a subset of exams in two distinct 
timeslots making sure that a hard constraint 
violation does not occur. 
Reassign Timeslot (RT) 
Randomly reassign a sequence of timeslots. 
Inverting Timeslot (IT) 
Inverting timeslots making sure that a hard 
constraint violation does not occur. 
Shifting Timeslot (ST) 
Left or right shifting a sequence of 
timeslots. 
 
The first heuristic is one of the graph colourings heuristic and which is used to create a feasible 
initial solution in this paper. Generally, it is important to have an easy and quick way of 
generating an initial solution. Note that it is not necessary though that initial solution should be 
completely feasible. However, it is preferred to be as feasible as possible because the quality of 
initial solution would affect the final solution. Therefore, in this paper, completely feasible 
solution is produced by using (LE) heuristic. The examination with the largest student 
enrolment is selected and kept in the vector. And then another exams which are not conflict with 
the exam in the vector, are added to that vector. This process is repeated until the required 
capacity for exams in the vector is less than the total capacity and unscheduled exam list is 
empty. Finally, this exam vector which satisfied all hard constraints is assigned to the timeslot 
sequentially. For the solution representation; there are two forms of assignment such as: 
 
Exam-Timeslot assignment  
 
Exam- Classroom assignment.  
In this paper, the first one is used to represent of the solution. By taking the advantages of HH 
method, to produce the feasible solution of all data instances is the aim of this paper. Moreover, 
one of the contributions of this paper is that the average timeslot per exam is also used to be 
balance in exam-timeslot assignment. Otherwise, many exams are assigned to a timeslot 
whereas few exams are assigned in another timeslot.  
 
The rest four low level heuristics from the table 3 are used in the reinforcement learning process 
to improve the solution to get the optimal solution which meets the objective. These heuristics 
are also called the slot move in [2]. The following figure shows the swapping a set of assigned 
exams in two distinct timeslot as an example. In figure, the exams e2, e3, e5 are assigned 

 
timeslot 5 whereas the exams e4 and e1 are assigned in timeslot 2. After the heuristic, ST-KC 
has been applied; the set of exams assigned in each timeslot will be changed.  
 
 
 
 
                              e2, e3, e5         e4, e1 
 
 
 
 
                                e4, e1 
 
 e2, e3, e5 
 
 
Figure 2.  Example of Swap Timeslot with Kempe Chain (ST-KC) 
 
4.2. Reinforcement Learning 
For the heuristic selection process in hyper heuristics, machine learning techniques are vital to 
make the right choices. Learning can be achieved in an offline or online manner. An online 
learning hyper heuristic learns through the feedback obtained during the search process while 
solving a given problem. In addition, it is better than offline method. Most of the existing online 
learning hyper heuristic incorporates reinforcement learning (RL). It is a sub-field of machine 
learning, represents an important direction for research in Artificial Intelligence [9]. RL is a 
framework for learning an optimal policy of a task from trials. It requires less a priori 
knowledge. Furthermore, it is successfully applied to scheduling, control, game theory and so 
on. However, the quality of solution obtained by using RL is not satisfactory in many times. 
However, EGD can control to make a decision whether it is accepts or rejects, after the chosen 
heuristic has been applied to initial solution. In this paper, not only a simple P: 1-N: 1(Additive 
adaption-Negative adaption) strategy to increase and decrease the utility value and but also 
maximum utility method are used for RL. For the parameter setting for lower bound and upper 
bound of utility values in RL, we follow the reference [9] and the values can be seen at the 
Section 5. 
 
4.3. Great Deluge (GD) and its variant 
The Great Deluge algorithm (GD) is a genetic algorithm applied to optimization problems. It is 
similar in many ways to the hill-climbing and simulated annealing algorithms. In GD, the water 
level is set to a value higher than the expected penalty of the best solution at the start of the 
search. Then the water level is decreased in a linear fashion during the search until it reaches a 
value of zero [19]. It is a well known acceptance method proposed by (Dueck; 1993, Burke et 
al., 2003). There are many variants form of GD in the literature such as NLGD, EGD and FD. 
They are discussed in the next section in detail. 
 
4.3.1. Extended Great Deluge 
In fact, the concept of EGD algorithm is quite similar with the hyper heuristic method. As far as 
the author knows, it has been considered first time as move acceptance for hyper heuristic. It has 
advantages to require the tuning of a few input parameters that can represent the search time. It 
can provide a wider test with the hidden data sets for consistency in the approaches.  Moreover, 
it can be interested to run all techniques at some future point with further hidden data sets. It is 
also proved to be both robust and general. Because of these advantages, it has been successfully 
1 
5 
8 
7 
2 
3 
6 
4 
1 
5 
8 
  7 
2 
3 
6 
4 
Before 
After 

applied to many optimization problems such as buffer allocation problem, redundancy 
allocation problem and so on.  
Therefore, in this paper, it is investigated to make further improvement in hyper heuristic or not. 
The standard GDA has been extended by adding reheat mechanism, step 13 in figure 1, similar 
to that employed with simulated annealing in timetabling. The aim of this approach is to both 
improve the speed at which an optimal solution can be found and at the same time utilize the 
benefits of this technique in avoiding the trap of local optima. In addition, the Great Deluge 
generally can cause the continuous lack of improvement, which means the final solution is same 
with the initial after the complete execution, which can lead to RL to select only one heuristic 
repeatedly.  Rather than terminating, the extended approach employs reheating in order to relax 
the boundary condition to allow worse moves to be applied to the current solution. Cooling 
continues and the boundary is reduced at a rate according to the remaining length of the run. 
The initial decay rate of the EGD is used to show how fast the boundary is reduced and 
ultimately the condition for accepting worse moves is narrowed. In this paper, we use the half-
life decay rate, is the amount of time it takes for half of the amount of substance to decay to 
attempt to reach the optimal solution. The wait parameter is used to invoke the reheat 
mechanism. It can be specified in terms of percentage or number of total moves in the process 
[3].  
 
4.3.2. Flex-Deluge  
 
An extension of the Great Deluge algorithm is “Flex-Deluge”, where the acceptance of uphill 
moves depends on a “flexibility” coefficient kf (0<= kf<=1). The acceptance rules are outlined 
in Expression (2): 
 
P′=P + kf (B - P) 
when P < B 
P′=P 
when P ≥ B. 
           (2) 
 
by varying kf, it is possible to obtain an algorithm with characteristics of both the original Great 
Deluge (kf = 1) and greedy Hill-Climbing (kf = 0). This method enables the search procedure to 
develop with an adaptive level of strictness of acceptance for each particular move [8]. Thus, in 
this paper, the flexibility coefficient value for the all data instances can be seen in the Section 5. 
 
4.3.3. Non-Linear Great Deluge 
 
Another extension of GD is non-linear great deluge algorithm (NLGD) in which the acceptance 
criterion refers to accepting improving and non-improving low-level heuristics depending of the 
performance of the heuristic and the current water level B.  Improving heuristics are always 
accepted while non-improving ones are accepted only if the detriment in quality is less than or 
equal B.  The initial water level is usually set to the quality of the initial solution and then 
decreased by a non-linear function proposed in [17] as follows: 
 
B = B × (exp−δ (rnd [min, max])) + β  
 
 
 
(3) 
 
The various parameters in Eq. (3) control the speed and the shape of the water level decay rate. 
Parameter β influences the shape of the decay rate and it represents the minimum expected 
penalty corresponding to the best solution.  The role of parameters min and max is to control the 
speed of the decay rate.  Therefore, for higher values of min and max, the water level decreases 
more rapidly and hence, improvements to the solution quality are also achieved faster [14].  As 
far as the author knows, it has been employed only for the university course timetabling 
problem [5, 13, 14 and 16]. So, this paper is first used and tested for exam timetabling problem. 
The parameter values are being set not to be specified for all data instances and these are shown 
in table 4. 

 
4.4. Three HH Methods for Exam Timetabling Problem 
 
The first HH method, RL-EGD has already been proposed and published as our previous job 
[10]. It is capable of producing feasible solutions for all problem instances and comparable 
results in the literature. Now other two HH methods such as RL-FD and RL-NLGD for exam 
timetabling problem are implemented and compared with it. The main differences of these three 
HH methods can be seen at the step 10 of the figures 3, 4 and 5.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  RL-EGD HH framework 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  RL-FD HH framework 
RL-EGD 
1. Input: UtilityValue[ 4],  noOfHeuristic=4, maxIteration=1000, iterationCount=1, 
LLHs;  
2. Construct Initial Solution 
3. Calculate initial cost function f(S) 
4. Set Initial Boundary Level B= f(S) 
5. Set initial decay Rate •B based on Cooling Parameter 
6. While ( iterationCount<maxIteration) 
 7. Choose LLH by using  RL ( ) 
 8. Apply the chosen Heuristic S* on S 
 9. Calculate f(S*) // Calculate cost; 
   10. ComparedByEGD( ); 
 
{     If f(S*) <= f(S) or (f(S*) <= B Then  
    
Accept S = S* 
    
LowerBoundary B = B – •B 
 // Reheat- Mechanism 
    
If no improvement in given time T 
 
 
 
Reset Boundary Level B0 = f(S) 
 
 
Set new decay rate •B based on Secondary  
 
 
 
Cooling Parameter  
 
     Else    Reject S*; 
 
 
OldCost=CurrentCost;        } 
 
 
 
RL-FD 
 
1. Input: UtilityValue[ 4],  noOfHeuristic=4, maxIteration=1000, iterationCount=1, 
LLHs; CurrentCost=0.0,OldCost=0.0; 
2. Coefficient _Kf =0.5 // (0
kf
1) 
3. Construct Initial Solution 
4. Calculate initial cost function f(S) 
5. Set Initial Boundary Level:   boundaryLevelFD = f(S) 
6. While ( iterationCount<maxIteration) 
7. 
Choose LLH by using    RL( ) 
8. 
Apply the chosen Heuristic S* on S 
9. 
Calculate f(S*) // Calculate cost(); 
10. 
ComparedByFlexD() 
   {    IF (CurrentCost<=OldCost||CurrentCost<= boundaryLevelFD)  
 
  
then    
    
 
Accept S = S* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OldCost=CurrentCost+ Coefficient_Kf*(boundaryLevelFD- 
 
CurrentCost ) 
 
  Else   
 Reject S*; 
 
 
OldCost=CurrentCost; 
   } 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  RL-NLGD Framework 
5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Our experimental analysis is making on the computer Pentium IV, Dell with the RAM 2GB .We 
tested the three HH methods on 31 instances. These are 13 instances proposed by Carter et al. 
and 18 instances created by instance generator. All of these data instances and random instance 
generator can be available from the link: “http://www.asap.cs.nott.ac.uk/resources/data.shtml. 
 
Each data instance is executed 10 times as shown in the following table. Each run is performed 
starting from the same initial configuration. The HH methods are implemented in Java and the 
parameters and environmental settings are as shown in the following table.  In the parameter 
setting, Coefficient_Kf is used in the RL-FD while β, Bmin , Bmax, δ are being used in RL-NLGD. 
For the values of these parameters, we follow the reference [16] because that paper provided the 
better results. 
 
Table 4. Parameter Setting Values 
Parameters 
Value 
Number of runs 
10 per each data instances 
Number of Iterations 
Maximum Iteration=1000 
Coefficient _Kf 
0.5 
β 
0.0 
Bmin 
100000 
RL-NLGD 
 
1. 
Input: utilityValue[4],noOfHeuristic=4,maxIteration=1000, iterationCount=1, 
 LLHs; CurrentCost, OldCost, β =0.0,Bmin =100000,  Bmax =300000, δ =5*10-10  
2. 
Construct Initial Solution 
3. 
Calculate initial cost function f(S) 
4. 
Set Initial Boundary Level boundaryLevelNLGD=OldCost;  
5. 
Set initial decay Rate  
6. 
While ( iterationCount<maxIteration) 
7. {  Choose LLH by using   RL ( ) 
8.    Apply the chosen Heuristic S* on S 
9.    Calculate f(S*) 
10.    ComparedByNLGD() 
{   If(CurrentCost<=OldCost||CurrentCost<= boundaryLevelNLGD) then 
 
Accept S = S* 
 
B = B*(exp−δ (rnd[min,max]))+β 
 
              Else   Reject S*; 
 
 
 OldCost=CurrentCost; 
 
 
} 
 

Bmax 
300000 
δ 
5*10-10 
Wait Value for reheat mechanism 
25% 
Lower bound 
0.0 
Upper Bound 
40.0 
Utility Value for each low level heuristic 
0.75*Upper Bound 
 
To make a comparison, the Lowest Best Cost is used as the performance criterion for all 
experiments. According to the objective function, the lowest the cost, the better the timetable is. 
The results of lowest best cost for each HH methods are presented in the following graphs.  
 
The figure 6 shows the comparison of the Lowest Best Cost on small 9 data instances. At the 
same time, the figure 7 shows the comparison on large 9 data instances. Although there is no 
significant difference in the cost values of three HH methods in each dataset, it is observed that 
RL-EGD can provide the lowest best cost in small five data sets whereas the other two HH 
methods, RL-FD and RL-NLGD can produce the lowest cost in two datasets. Likewise, it is 
observed that RL-EGD can also provide the lowest best cost in large five data sets. The figure 8 
shows the comparison for 5 data instances from the Carter’s Datasets. We choose these data 
instances by randomly. Here, because of the reheat mechanism of the RL-EGD, it can also 
produce much lower costs in three instances than those by other two HH methods. In these 
figure, the symbol star shows the data instance got the lowest best cost by RL-EGD HH 
approach.  
 
 
Figure 6. Comparison of Three HH methods on Small 9 Data Instances generated by Random 
Generator 

 
Figure 7. Comparison of Three HH methods on 9 large data instances generated by Random 
Generator 
 
Figure 8. Comparison of three HH methods on 5 data instances from Carter’s Dataset 

 
Figure 9. Comparison of Average Lowest Best Cost 
For another comparison, the figure 9 represents the comparison of average lowest cost of all 
small data instances. Among three HH methods, it can be seen that RL-EGD methods has 
achieved the lowest average best cost in most of the data instances except the SP25.exm and 
SP15.exm. In figures, X axis shows the data instances names while Y axis is being representing 
the lowest cost of the best solution. 
 
6. CONCLUSION 
Hyper heuristics have been starting to prove themselves as fast and effective methods for 
solving complex real world optimization problems. Therefore, the RL-EGD HH method is also 
proposed as our first job and also achieves the better solutions for the problem domain. Now, as 
the next step, we have made a comparison it with two other HH methods.  From the 
experiments, it can be concluded that the method RL-EGD can provide the lowest best cost for 
most of the data instances and compare with the other methods in the literature. To be able to 
schedule invigilators such as professors, doctors and teaching assistant to proctor the scheduled 
exams, as the future work, another enhancement would be to integrate this system with the 
invigilation timetabling system.
