Towards Autoformalization of Mathematics and Code Correctness:
Experiments with Elementary Proofs
Garett Cunningham
School of EECS
Ohio University
Athens, OH 45701

Razvan C. Bunescu
Department of Computer Science
UNC Charlotte
Charlotte, NC 28223

David Juedes
School of EECS
Ohio University
Athens, OH 45701

Abstract
The ever-growing complexity of mathemati-
cal proofs makes their manual veriﬁcation by
mathematicians very cognitively demanding.
Autoformalization seeks to address this by
translating proofs written in natural language
into a formal representation that is computer-
veriﬁable via interactive theorem provers. In
this paper, we introduce a semantic parsing ap-
proach, based on the Universal Transformer
architecture, that translates elementary math-
ematical proofs into an equivalent formaliza-
tion in the language of the Coq interactive the-
orem prover.
The same architecture is also
trained to translate simple imperative code dec-
orated with Hoare triples into formally veri-
ﬁable proofs of correctness in Coq.
Exper-
iments on a limited domain of artiﬁcial and
human-written proofs show that the models
generalize well to intermediate lengths not
seen during training and variations in natural
language.
1
Introduction
To the uninitiated, the notion of mathematical proof
represents simply an argument written by people
to convince others of mathematical truth. How-
ever, in a real sense, mathematical proof must have
formal underpinnings that go beyond the written
argument. Arguments that lack such underpinnings
might have fatal errors or even logical inconsisten-
cies (see, for example, Russell’s Paradox (Irvine
and Deutsch, 2021)). Nevertheless, mathematical
arguments written in natural language are the norm
and they have great value.
In Tymoczko (1979)’s well-known paper that dis-
cusses a somewhat controversial (at the time) proof
of the Four Color Theorem (Appel and Haken,
1977; Appel et al., 1977), he explores “what is a
mathematical proof?” He posits that all mathemati-
cal proofs must be (i) convincing, (ii) surveyable,
and (iii) formalizable. The ﬁrst two points are for
the reader—proofs must be convincing to and com-
prehensible by mathematicians. For the third point,
he notes that, “Most mathematicians and philoso-
phers believe that any acceptable proof can be for-
malized. We can always ﬁnd an appropriate formal
language and theory in which the informal proof
can be embedded and ‘ﬁlled out’ into a rigorous
formal proof.” For most mathematicians, this third
part is crucial for ensuring that subtle, but fatal,
errors in logic do not exist in mathematical proof.
Great progress has been made since the 1970’s
in fully formalizing signiﬁcant mathematical re-
sults. For instance, the Feit-Thompson Theorem
(Gonthier et al., 2013; Gonthier, 2013) and the Four
Color Theorem (Gonthier, 2008) have been for-
mally veriﬁed using the proof assistant Coq (Bertot
and Castéran, 2013), and the Kepler Conjecture
(Hales, 2005; Hales et al., 2017) has been formally
veriﬁed using the proof assistants Isabelle and HOL
Light (Nipkow et al., 2002). Moreover, proof assis-
tants have demonstrated immense utility for soft-
ware veriﬁcation, such as the full certiﬁcation of a
C compiler (Leroy, 2009). Proofs demonstrating
the correct behavior of code share a similar struc-
ture to proofs in pure mathematics, where systems
like Hoare logic replace standard ﬁrst-order logic.
Thus, Tymoczko’s criteria for mathematical proof
can be extended to the veriﬁcation of programs.
For many experts, LaTeX provides an excellent
tool for satisfying the ﬁrst two criteria. In addition,
carefully written LaTeX (Higham, 2020) provides
a rich structure for establishing the third criterion.
The vast majority of modern mathematics is ex-
pressed using natural language (NL), with the over-
whelming majority typeset in LaTeX. Fully for-
malizing mathematics using proof assistants is still
a difﬁcult and time consuming task. This paper
takes some preliminary steps toward bridging this
gap by exploring how modern machine learning
techniques can be used to convert carefully writ-
ten LaTeX into equivalent, and formally veriﬁed
arXiv:2301.02195v1  [cs.CL]  5 Jan 2023

mathematics in Coq, a process referred to as auto-
formalization in the literature (Szegedy, 2020).
Wang et al. (2018, 2020) explored the similar
task of translating mathematical statements from
LaTeX into Mizar, using LSTM-based models with
attention. To generate aligned LaTeX-Mizar pairs,
they use a tool (Bancerek, 2006) that translates
top-level Mizar statements into artiﬁcial LaTeX
sentences, a task that is facilitated by the fact that
Mizar is human readable and similar in length with
the corresponding LaTeX version. Carman (2021)
evaluated the competency of LSTMs toward for-
malizing a restricted set of artiﬁcially generated the-
orems about simple arithmetic expressions, report-
ing reasonable success over expression lengths seen
during training. More recently, Wu et al. (2022)
evaluated Codex and PaLM on a signiﬁcantly more
limited, but human-written set of theorems in alge-
bra and number theory.
In contrast to prior work, we address the auto-
formalization of both theorems and their proofs,
and extend the scope to proofs of code correctness.
We use a number of manually written mathemati-
cal statements to abstract a complex grammar that
is then used to generate a dataset of substantially
longer and more diverse mathematical theorems
and proofs.
We develop an architecture based
on the Universal Transformer (Dehghani et al.,
2018) and adapt a copying mechanism (Gu et al.,
2016) to handle arbitrary numbers and variable
names at test time. The models are evaluated exten-
sively on their ability to systematically generalize
to statement lengths not seen during training, for
which we report sequence-level accuracy as well
as a semantic-level accuracy calculated by combin-
ing sequence-level accuracy for the theorem and
running Coq to determine if the generated proof
is correct. Code and data are made available at
https://github.com/gc974517/autoformalization.
2
Dataset of Theorems and Proofs
We create two independent datasets of mathemat-
ical statements that overall correspond to four
classes of theorems and proofs: the ﬁrst dataset con-
tains three classes of arithmetic statements (EVEN-
ODD, COMPOSITES, and POWERS), described in
detail in Section 2.1, and the second dataset contain-
ing statements about code correctness via Hoare
logic (POLY), described in detail in Section 2.2.
In each example, the input theorem-proof pair is
given in LaTeX, whereas the formalized output is
represented in Coq. This work focuses on the proof
assistant Coq (Bertot and Castéran, 2013) because
(a) there is a rich set of mathematical libraries that
have been developed for it, (b) it has been used
successfully to reason about signiﬁcant computa-
tion artifacts, such as the ComperCert C compiler
(Leroy, 2009)), and (c) it beneﬁts from a rich set of
training material for the proof assistant related to
software veriﬁcation (Pierce et al., 2010).
Each class of examples demonstrates features
necessary for the successful autoformalization of
mathematical theorems and proofs. For example,
POWERS and COMPOSITES examples may deﬁne
useful terminology to make the theorems shorter,
e.g. proving that 4 is a square, or conversely they
may state theorems directly without any prelim-
inary deﬁnitions, e.g. proving ∃n. n2 = 4. As
shown in Figures 3 and 4, this corresponds in Coq
to aliasing propositions using the Definition key-
word. Additionally, the examples in the dataset
provide a stress test of the copying mechanism de-
scribed in Section 3.1, testing its ability to learn
the correct order and number of terms to include
in mathematical expressions, as well as their place-
ment in theorems and proofs, in a way that general-
izes to arbitrary tokens in mathematical language.
For each of the four classes of theorems and
proofs, we manually created a few examples our-
selves in order to guide the construction of a com-
plex grammar that is then used to generate a dataset
of substantially longer and more diverse mathemat-
ical theorems and proofs. Each dataset is generated
using its corresponding grammar in an identical
way. First, a random seed is sampled that controls
the overall structure of the theorem, proof, and
deﬁnition, if any. Then, the skeleton structure of
the proof is completed with phrases that are sam-
pled from a separate context-free grammar. The
coarse control of the skeleton structure allows the
construction of examples with interesting features
like sublemmas, forward or backward proof direc-
tion, coreference, or additional conditions for the
theorem, among others.
Many of the difﬁculties in formalizing mathe-
matical statements from NL into Coq stem from
the wide variability in the level of detail of mathe-
matical proofs, and the frequent mismatch between
what is considered an acceptable inference step in
NL proofs vs. an inference step in Coq. Further-
more, there may be multiple Coq proofs for any
given theorem, at different levels of granularity. We

LaTeX Input Sequence
Theorem. 28M + 308 is even.
Proof. We know the summation between even numbers
in N will be an even number. Observe that 308 is known
to be even. Additionally, note that the pair M × 28 is
trivially even. This is true because the coefﬁcient 28 is
even.
Coq Output Sequence
Require Import Arith.
Theorem M28_308:
forall M : nat, Nat.even(28 * M + 308) = true.
Proof.
intros.
repeat rewrite Nat.even_add.
assert (H1: Nat.even 308 = true).
{ auto. }
assert (H2: Nat.even 28 = true).
{ auto. }
assert (H3: Nat.even (28 * M) = true).
{ rewrite Nat.even_mul.
rewrite H2.
auto. }
rewrite H1.
rewrite H3.
auto.
Qed.
Figure 1: Generated example from the EVEN-ODD set.
address this ambiguity by requiring the structure of
the Coq proof to match the overall structure of the
NL proof. This is achieved by quasi-synchronously
generating the LaTeX and Coq versions of mathe-
matical statements, while still allowing for some
simple re-orderings in order to improve general-
ization performance, e.g. swapping arguments of
commutative operations.
In total, the grammar-based method for gen-
erating examples can theoretically produce over
283 million unique arithmetic examples and over
491,000 unique code examples, before consider-
ing variations in phrasing by sampling from the
context-free grammar.
2.1
Arithmetic Statements
We generated three classes of mathematical state-
ments, i.e. theorem-proof pairs:
• EVEN-ODD: an expression is even or odd.
• COMPOSITES: a number is composite.
• POWERS: a number is an integer power of n.
EVEN-ODD examples contain arithmetic expres-
sions of n variables with even coefﬁcients that are
summed with a constant term, meaning that the
parity of this constant determines the parity of the
LaTeX Input Sequence
Theorem. 450 + a · 192 + j · 462 is guaranteed to be
even for any natural terms j, and a.
Proof. It can be justiﬁed that 192 · a + j · 462 is trivially
even. Note that 192a is an even number in N because
multiplying between an even integer with an arbitrary
number in N is guaranteed to be even. Likewise, 462j
is trivially an even number in N. The claim is proven as
a consequence of the fact that the sum of even numbers
with an even number will be in itself an even number.
Therefore, our theorem holds.
Coq Output Sequence
Require Import Arith.
Theorem a450_192j_450_even:
forall j a : nat,
Nat.even (192 * a + 462 * j + 450) = true.
Proof.
intros.
rewrite Nat.even_add.
assert (H1: Nat.even (192 * a) = true).
{ rewrite Nat.even_mul.
auto. }
assert (H2: Nat.even (462 * j) = true).
{ rewrite Nat.even_mul.
auto. }
assert (H3: Nat.even
(192 * a + 462 * j) = true).
{ repeat rewrite Nat.even_add.
rewrite H1.
rewrite H2.
auto. }
rewrite H3.
auto.
Qed.
Figure 2: Instance of sublemma use in the EVEN-ODD
dataset. The proof that the sum of non-constant terms is
even (assertion H3) is given before proving the theorem.
whole expression. Proofs make use of this fact
with varying rigor based on our manually designed
grammar, an example of which is shown by Figure
1. The Coq program is generated concurrently with
the paired LaTeX example. The example shown in
Figure 2 illustrates the generation and use of prior
facts to prove an implicit sublemma, in both the
natural language and matching Coq version.
Examples of theorems and proofs for POWERS
and COMPOSITES share a similar structure in both
their LaTeX and Coq forms, as shown in Figures 3
and 4, respectively. The theorems assert the ex-
istence of a natural number such that a deﬁning
property holds and their proofs are constructive,
with the distinction that examples for composites
prove factorization into n factors.
For both training and testing, we generate 5,000
even-odd, 5,000 composites, and 2,000 powers ex-

LaTeX Input Sequence
Deﬁnition. We deﬁne that w ∈N is a composite natural
number if taking some R, Q ∈N we have Q, R ≥2 and
Q × R = w.
Theorem. 35 is a composite whole number.
Proof. Remember that a composite natural number is the
multiplication between Q and R such that Q and R ≥2.
Allow R = 7, Q = 5. We justify the result is valid as
35 = Q · R.
Coq Output Sequence
Require Import Lia.
Definition composite
(w : nat) :=
exists R Q : nat,
(Q >= 2) /\ (R >= 2)
/\ (Q * R = w).
Theorem w_composite:
composite 35.
Proof.
unfold composite.
exists 7.
exists 5.
lia.
Qed.
Figure 3: Generated COMPOSITES example.
LaTeX Input Sequence
Deﬁnition. We say o is a square whenever there exists
some whole number Z such that Z ≥2 and o = Z2.
Theorem. o = 64 is a square.
Proof. Let Z = 8. Observe that 64 = 82. Also notice
Z = 8 is more than or equal to 2. This yields 64 is a
square whole number.
Coq Output Sequence
Require Import Lia.
Definition square
(o : nat) :=
exists Z : nat,
(Z >= 2) /\ (o = Z^2).
Theorem square_64:
square 64.
Proof.
unfold square.
exists 8.
assert (H1: 8 >= 2).
{ lia. }
repeat split.
apply H1.
Qed.
Figure 4: Generated example from the POWERS set.
amples. We train on values of n ∈{2, 3, 5, 7, 9}
and test on values n ∈{2, 3, . . . , 12}, where n rep-
resents the number of variables in the arithmetic
expression, the number of factors, or the power,
respectively. This is done in order to evaluate the
model’s ability to generalize to unseen arithmetic
expression lengths and numbers of factors.
2.1.1
Handwritten Examples
We also created a small collection of 45 human-
written LaTeX theorem-proof pairs to evaluate per-
formance on examples outside of our manually
generated grammar. These are distinct from the
original manually written examples that were used
to guide the development of the generative gram-
mar. There are 15 examples for each type of proof
from the arithmetic set, using the same vocabulary
with a number of unseen grammatical structures.
2.2
Code Correctness Statements
We create a dataset of correctness proofs about
short programs written in the imperative program-
ming language Imp (Pierce et al., 2018), which we
call POLY. The programs represent various algo-
rithms for evaluating a polynomial, and their proofs
of correctness verify that the programs correctly
model the polynomial as a mathematical function.
Proofs are conducted as either fully decorated pro-
grams or as sequences of Hoare triples with natural
language justifying steps in between. An example
is shown in Figure 5.
For both training and testing data, we generate
5,000 examples. We train on programs containing
2, 3, 5, 7, 9, and 11 lines, then test on programs con-
taining from 2 up to 14 lines to evaluate the model’s
ability to generalize to novel program lengths.
3
Semantic Parsing Architecture
To formalize LaTeX statements into Coq, we de-
veloped an encoder-decoder architecture based on
the Universal Transformer (Dehghani et al., 2018).
Similar to Csordás et al. (2021), we do so by adding
recursive passes into the encoder and decoder of
a base Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017), thus
making the model analogous to a Universal Trans-
former without adaptive computation time (ACT).
Further, we introduce a copying mechanism and
support for out-of-vocabulary mathematical terms.
3.1
Copying Mechanism
Mathematical language contains features uncom-
mon or non-existent in natural language, such as
numbers, variables, and carefully deﬁned terminol-
ogy. In order to address the use of general math-
ematical jargon, these tokens are replaced in the

LaTeX Input Sequence
Coq Output Sequence
Theorem. Consider the following series of
commands such that
S := 3;
S := 3 + S * Z;
S := 1 + S * Z
Allow Z = y, for any natural number y, ahead
of running this code then S = 3×y2+3×y+1
after the set of instructions has executed.
Proof. By application of usual Hoare logic:
{Z = y}
S := 3;
{Z = y ∧S = 3}
S := 3 + S * Z;
{Z = y ∧S = 3 × y + 3}
S := 1 + S * Z
{Z = y ∧S = 3 × y2 + 3 × y + 1}
Hence, this program is shown to be correct.
Require Import String.
From PLF Require Import Imp.
From PLF Require Import Hoare.
Theorem poly_code_correct:
forall y : nat,
{{ Z = y }}
S := 3;
S := 3 + S * Z;
S := 1 + S * Z
{{ S = 3 * y ^ 2 + 3 * y + 1 }}.
Proof.
intros.
apply hoare_seq with
(Q := (
(Z = y /\ S = 3)
)%assertion).
apply hoare_seq with
(Q := (
(Z = y /\ S = 3 * y + 3)
)%assertion).
apply hoare_seq with
(Q := (
(Z = y /\ S = 3 * y^2 + 3 * y + 1)
)%assertion).
all: eapply hoare_consequence_pre;
try (apply hoare_asgn || assn_auto'').
Qed.
Figure 5: Generated POLY example: [Left] the Hoare logic proof; [Right] the code correctness proof in Coq.
LaTeX input with generic forms denoting their us-
age, such as <var1> up to <varN> for variables,
which effectively ensures generalization to vari-
able renaming (Ferreira et al., 2022), <nat1> up to
<natN> for numbers, or <def> for deﬁnitions, cou-
pled with the use of a copying mechanism adapted
from Gu et al. (2016). Note that a different generic
token is introduced for each unique numerical con-
stant or variable literal in the theorem and its proof,
and the corresponding generic token is used in
the Coq version. For example, considering the
⟨LaTeX, Coq⟩pair in Figure 3, <nat1>, <nat2>,
<nat3>, and <nat4> would be used to replace the
constants 2, 35, 7, and 5 respectively, everywhere in
the LaTeX and Coq statements. Similarly, <var1>,
<var2>, and <var3> were used to replace variable
literals w, R, and Q. This is in contrast to using
just two generic tokens <nat> and <var> every-
where, which would make all numbers coreferent
and all variables coreferent. Preliminary experi-
ments validated the utility of encoding these dis-
tinctions while maintaining the correct coreference
in both LaTeX and Coq statements.
Overall, by using generic tokens for numbers,
variables, and deﬁnitions, only a limited set of em-
beddings need to be trained and the model is forced
to utilize contextual information in order to appro-
priately copy tokens into the Coq output. In this
way, the model has the ability to generalize to un-
seen numbers or variable and deﬁnition names.
The original CopyNet (Gu et al., 2016) used an
encoder-decoder architecture with a copying mech-
anism to calculate the probabilities of generating
in-vocabulary tokens vs. copying tokens from the
input sequence to the output. Our autoformaliza-
tion task guarantees mutual exclusivity between
generating (g) and copying (c) tokens, which al-
lows using a simpliﬁed formula for calculating the
probability of producing a token yt at time step t.
Letting Vc denote the Coq vocabulary, X denote
the input sequence of LaTeX tokens, and X denote
the collection of unique tokens in X, we calculate
the probability of producing yt as:
p(yt) =







p(yt, g) = 1
Zt
eψg(yt),
yt ∈Vc
p(yt, c) = 1
Zt
X
xj∈X:xj=yt
eψc(xj), yt ∈X
where Zt =
X
yt∈Vc
eψg(yt) +
X
xj∈X
eψc(xj). The scor-

ing functions are given by ψg(yt) = v⊤
ytWost and
ψc(xj) = tanh

h⊤
j Wc

st, where vyt is a one-
hot encoding of yt, hj is the hidden encoder state
for the input token xj, st is the decoder state at step
t, and Wo and Wc are learnable parameters.
3.2
Encoder-Decoder Architecture
We diverge from the standard Transformer archi-
tecture in a few crucial ways:
• Probabilities are calculated via p(yt) above.
• Absolute positional encodings are removed.
• Self-attention uses relative positional repre-
sentations as in Shaw et al. (2018).
• Stacks of N encoder/decoder blocks have T
recurrent passes.
All other aspects of the model remain unchanged
from the original Transformer. We emphasize rel-
ative positional information over absolute in our
model architecture. Preliminary evaluations on the
EVEN-ODD dataset showed that Transformer mod-
els that use absolute positional encodings obtain
0% sequence-level accuracy on expression lengths
that are not seen at training time. Removing re-
liance on absolute position resolves this type of
systematic generalization. The use of relative posi-
tional encodings for the Transformer-based models
was thus essential for achieving stronger systematic
generalization, which also agrees with the ﬁndings
of Csordás et al. (2021) on other NLP tasks.
4
Experimental Evaluations
To evaluate the performance of trained models, we
ran two primary experiments: ﬁrst on the collection
of arithmetic examples, then on the collection of
code correctness examples. All models are eval-
uated in terms of sequence-level accuracy, where
an example is considered correctly processed only
if the generated Coq sequence for both the theo-
rem and its proof perfectly matches token by to-
ken the ground truth sequence. We also report
semantic-level accuracy, for which the generated
Coq theorem needs to attains a perfect sequence-
level accuracy and the Coq engine veriﬁes that the
generated Coq proof truly proves the generated
Coq theorm, regardless of whether it matches the
ground truth version of the proof. This empha-
sizes that the model was able to capture the general
meaning of the natural language proof by correctly
translating the theorem and successfully proving it
EVEN-ODD
COMPOSITES
POLY
n
Seq
Sem
Seq
Sem
Both
2
99.6
99.8
76.7
97.6
100.0
3
99.4
99.6
64.6
94.2
100.0
4
99.4
99.4
56.1
93.9
82.1
5
99.2
99.6
54.9
94.4
99.2
6
98.8
98.8
57.1
94.3
45.1
7
99.1
99.5
58.5
93.4
96.5
8
93.8
94.0
53.5
88.3
15.7
9
98.6
98.6
53.7
93.7
98.2
10
7.0
7.0
1.2
1.6
35.6
11
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
93.5
12+
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
POWERS
Seq = 100.0
Sem = 100
Table 1:
Sequence-level (Seq) and semantic-level
(Sem) accuracy (%) on test examples, split by expres-
sion length, with the exception of POWERS.
using the natural language version as a guide.
All experiments were performed on one NVIDIA
RTX-A6000 GPU with 48GB of memory.
4.1
Arithmetic Statements
We evaluate a Transformer model on the full data
combining EVEN-ODD + COMPOSITES + POWERS
and using both the theorem and its proof in each
sequence. We tune a model with embedding and
state sizes of 32, a feed forward width of 256, 4
encoder and decoder blocks with 4 recurrent passes,
4 attention heads, and a clipping value of 2 for self-
attention. We trained this model over minibatches
of size 20, optimized with Adam using β1 = 0.9,
β2 = 0.98, ε = 1e −9, and an initial learning rate
of 0.001, annealed by a factor of 1/
√
10 based on
training loss plateaus with a patience of 5 epochs.
The results in Table 1 show that the model gener-
alizes well to the intermediate lengths of {4, 6, 8},
with a small number of correctly translated exam-
ples longer than the maximum of 9 used in training.
Otherwise, the model fails to generalize to longer
unseen lengths, which is not surprising, given that
Transformer models are known to fail dramatically
at systematic generalization on longer inputs for
various NLP tasks (Csordás et al., 2021), or to in-
cur substantial decrease in accuracy for longer sym-
bolic integration problems (Welleck et al., 2022).
Switching to semantic-level evaluation leads to a
signiﬁcant increase in accuracy for COMPOSITES,
with a more modest increase for EVEN-ODD.

4.2
Code Correctness Statements
We extend our scope to include data representing
proofs of program correctness using the language
of Hoare logic. We train a separate model with
the same embedding and state sizes, feed forward
width, and learning rates as in Section 4.1. Depth
is increased to 8 encoder and decoder blocks with 8
recurrent passes, 8 attention heads, and a clipping
value of 8. The model is trained over minibatches
of size 1 with Adam, with a patience of 3 epochs.
The POLY results shown in Table 1 demonstrate
that the model is able to generalize to program line
counts of {4, 6, 8, 10} unseen during training with
diminishing returns as the program length grows,
eventually failing to generalize for lengths longer
than the maximum seen in training. We observe
that increasing the depth of the model signiﬁcantly
improved generalization.
A model with identi-
cal hyperparameters to the arithmetic experiment
yielded less then half the sequence-level accuracy
for intermediate program lengths. Therefore, fur-
ther increasing the depth of the model could push
performance closer to optimal generalization to in-
termediate lengths at the cost of signiﬁcantly more
computing resources. Additionally, POLY exam-
ples are far less prone to non-fatal token swapping
errors. We observe that semantic-level accuracy is
identical to sequence-level, as all copying errors
compromised the validity of the proof. Therefore,
accuracies are shown as one column (Both).
4.3
Handwritten Examples
We also evaluate the semantic-level accuracy of
the trained models on the collection of 45 human-
written LaTeX theorem-proof pairs. This is done
by manually verifying that the generated Coq the-
orem corresponds to the LaTeX version and that
the subsequent proof is correct according to the
Coq interpreter. The fully trained model achieved
53.3% for both EVEN-ODD and COMPOSITES, and
73.3% for POWERS.
Mistakes in almost all cases are conﬁned to the
mishandling of out-of-vocabulary tokens, such as
mis-copying a variable within a deﬁnition or the
omission of an assertion in the proof tied to a term.
The model otherwise generated syntactically sound
Coq code. Mistakes strongly correlate with exam-
ples that deviate signiﬁcantly from the grammatical
structure of the artiﬁcial data. Thus, pre-trained lan-
guage models as evaluated by Wu et al. (2022) or
pre-training new models on mathematical corpora
like MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021) may serve to
alleviate the problems caused by the scarcity of
aligned natural and formal mathematics data.
5
Concluding Remarks
As we have seen, it is feasible to train machine
learning models to perform autoformalization over
very restricted domains of math and code correct-
ness proofs. These models show capability to sys-
tematically generalize to new expression lengths
and program sizes. Moreover, these models were
able to translate previously unseen hand written
natural language examples, albeit with lower ac-
curacy. We are hopeful that this approach can be
applied to autoformalization of a larger segment of
mathematics and code veriﬁcation.
As mentioned by Szegedy (2020), "Autoformal-
ization is not just a challenge: successful autofor-
malization would represent a breakthrough for gen-
eral AI with signiﬁcant implications in various do-
mains." We see an especially signiﬁcant impact in
education, where integration of autoformalization
into proof assistants for introductory mathematics
and software veriﬁcation courses would enable the
detection of missing steps or misconceptions in
students’ proofs.
