arXiv:2301.03133v1  [cs.NI]  9 Jan 2023
1
Transceiver Cooperative Learning-aided Semantic
Communications Against Mismatched Background
Knowledge Bases
Yanhu Wang, Student Member, IEEE, and Shuaishuai Guo, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Semantic communications learned on background
knowledge bases (KBs) have been identiﬁed as a promising
technology for communications between intelligent agents. Exist-
ing works assume that transceivers of semantic communications
share the same KB. However, intelligent transceivers may suffer
from the communication burden or worry about privacy leakage
to exchange data in KBs. Besides, the transceivers may indepen-
dently learn from the environment and dynamically update their
KBs, leading to timely sharing of the KBs infeasible. All these
cause the mismatch between the KBs, which may result in a
semantic-level misunderstanding on the receiver side. To address
this issue, we propose a transceiver cooperative learning-assisted
semantic communication (TCL-SC) scheme against mismatched
KBs. In TCL-SC, the transceivers cooperatively train seman-
tic encoder and decoder neuron networks (NNs) of the same
structure based on their own KBs. They periodically share the
parameters of NNs. To reduce the communication overhead of
parameter sharing, parameter quantization is adopted. More-
over, we discuss the impacts of the number of communication
rounds on the performance of semantic communication systems.
Experiments on real-world data demonstrate that our proposed
TCL-SC can reduce the semantic-level misunderstanding on the
receiver side caused by the mismatch between the KBs, especially
at the low signal-to-noise (SNR) ratio regime.
I. INTRODUCTION
Due to tremendous breakthroughs in artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI) and powerful chipsets, many intelligent applications such
as Sari of the Apple company, and self-driving vehicles, have
sprung up. Semantic communications, as a communication
paradigm beyond transmitting bits [1], [2], aim to precisely
convey the meaning of messages, rather than accurately trans-
mitting each symbol. It can signiﬁcantly reduce data trafﬁc
and meanwhile well support the communication requirement
of intelligent agents. It has been recognized as a promising
technology to make wireless networks signiﬁcantly more in-
telligent, energy-efﬁcient, and sustainable.
Owing to advances in deep learning, in particular natural
language processing (NLP) and computer vision, digging the
semantic meaning of data for transmission becomes possible.
In recent years, semantic communication systems learned on
background knowledge bases (KBs) at transceivers have been
developed for delivering text [3]–[5], image [6], [7], speech
[8], as well as multimodal data [9]. In semantic communication
systems, the transmitter uses a semantic encoding module
Y. Wang and S. Guo are all with the School of Control Science and
Engineering, Shandong University, China, and also with Shandong Key
Laboratory of Wireless Communication Technologies, Shandong University,

to extract semantic information based on its own KB, and
the receiver uses a semantic decoding module to recover
the meaning of messages based on its own KB. To make
the transceivers have the same interpretation of the transmit-
ted semantic data, existing works, e.g., [3]–[9], assume the
transceivers have the same KBs. However, in practice, the KBs
of the transmitter and receiver may be the same initially, they
may become different due to the variations of the environment
and/or the strength of the device’s ability to acquire data. The
mismatch between the KBs of the transmitter and receiver can
cause misunderstanding on the receiver side. For instance, the
KB of the transmitter has knowledge about cars, ships, and
birds, while the KB of the receiver has knowledge about cars,
ships, and planes. When the transmitter transmits semantic
information about birds, the receiver cannot understand it
precisely. This calls for a way to address the problem of the
mismatch between the KBs and avoid misunderstanding at the
receiver.
The communication participant sharing their own data with
another participant to update the KB seems to be a viable ap-
proach. However, there are the following intractable challenges
when applying it to address the above problem:
• Massive communication overhead: In reality, the data
acquired by devices are mainly images and videos. Direct
sharing of these data to another communication partici-
pant may result in unaffordable communication overhead.
• Expensive training cost: In general, the storage capacity
and computing power of the device are limited. Shared
data, especially images and videos, undoubtedly increase
the storage cost and training cost of the device.
• Privacy concerns: Data shared during the communica-
tion may be illegally stolen by adversaries leading to
privacy leakage. Also out of privacy protection, some
participants are reluctant to share the acquired data with
another communication participant.
These challenges motivate us to propose a feasible approach
to address the mismatch between the KBs in semantic com-
munication systems.
In this article, a new semantic communication framework
is developed to combat the mismatched KBs of the trans-
mitter and receiver without causing excessive communication
overhead, training costs as well as privacy concerns. As indi-
cated in previous studies [10], only exchanging parameters of
neuron networks (NNs) without data exchange could achieve
a balance between data privacy protection and data sharing

2
Source Encoding
Channel Encoding
Wireless
Channel
Channel Decoding
Bits
01001
01001
Bits
Noise
JSCC Encoding
Wireless
Channel
JSCC Decoding
Semantic Decoding
Semantic Encoding
Knowledge Base of
Transmitter
Knowledge Base of
Receiver
Sharing Knowledge
Semantic Features
Semantic Features
Noise
Semantic Noise
Source Decoding
Semantic communication: Accurate transmission of the meaning of messages
Traditional communication: Bit-level error-free transmission
Fig. 1. A comparison between traditional communication system and deep learning-enabled semantic communication system. The upper region of the graph
corresponds to the traditional communication system, and the lower region corresponds to the semantic communication system. In the traditional communication
system, the source is encoded as bit sequences by source encoding and recovered by source decoding module at the receiver. In the semantic communication
system, semantic encoding module is fused to extract semantic features. In addition to being disturbed by physical noise, semantic communication is also
disturbed by semantic noise which is caused by the ambiguity of words, sentences or symbols between the transmitter and receiver.
computing. Inspired by these ﬁndings, we design a transceiver
cooperative learning-aided semantic communication (TCL-
SC) framework, in which the transceivers cooperatively train
the semantic encoder and decoder NNs of the same structure
based on their own KBs and periodically share the parame-
ters of NNs. Obviously, TCL-SC still needs a large amount
of communication overhead for exchanging the parameters
precisely. Inspired by previous work [11], quantization is
adopted to reduce communication overhead. Also, the impact
of the number of communication rounds on the performance of
semantic communications is investigated, trying to ﬁnd out the
appropriate value that can reduce the communication overhead
without reducing the performance.
The main contributions of this article can be summarized
as follows.
• A TCL-SC scheme is proposed by using parameter shar-
ing to minimize the semantic loss caused by mismatched
KBs, which avoids excessive costs as data sharing needs.
• To reduce the communication overhead caused by pa-
rameter sharing, parameter quantization is adopted to
reduce the weights resolution. The effect of the number of
communication rounds on TCL-SC is investigated, and a
suitable value is chosen to achieve a compromise between
communication overhead and performance.
• The effectiveness of the proposed TCL-SC is validated
on text transmission tasks. Extensive experiments demon-
strate that, compared with baselines, the proposed TCL-
SC can well combat mismatched KBs and reduce the
misunderstanding on the receiver side, especially at the
low signal-to-noise (SNR) ratio.
In the remainder of the article, deep learning-enabled se-
mantic communications are ﬁrst introduced, and the differ-
ence from traditional communication systems is emphasized.
Next, the TCL-aided semantic communication scheme against
mismatched KBs is illustrated. Then, comprehensive experi-
ments are conducted are concluded and future directions are
presented. Finally, conclusions are drawn.
II. DEEP LEARNING-ENABLED SEMANTIC
COMMUNICATION SYSTEM
Recent advances in deep learning have made substantial
progress in semantic communications, which has been dormant
for many years [1], [2]. As shown in Fig. 1, a DL-enabled
semantic communication system consists of a transmitter and
a receiver. The transmitter includes a semantic coding mod-
ule and a joint source and channel coding (JSCC) module,
where the semantic encoding module based on the KB of
the transmitter extracts semantic features from the raw data
input, and the JSCC encoding module maps extracted semantic
features to the channel input. As the opposite process, the
receiver is equipped with a JSCC decoding module and a
semantic decoding module. The JSCC decoding module de-
codes the channel output for mitigating the channel distortion
and attenuation, then the semantic decoding module based on
the KB of the receiver recovers it to the original messages.
According to the previous papers [3]–[8], for text sources,
the semantic encoding and semantic decoding modules can be
composed of long short-term memory (LSTM) [3] or Trans-
former [4] networks. For image sources, convolutional neural
networks [6], [7] can be used to extract and recover semantic
information. For speech sources, SE-ResNet networks [8] can
be used to construct the semantic encoding and semantic
decoding module. The JSCC encoding and decoding modules
can generally be constructed by fully connected layers.
Compared to traditional communication systems which pur-
sue bit-level error-free transmission, semantic communications

3
aim an accurate transmission of the meaning of messages.
The semantic encoding and decoding neuron networks (NNs)
play the role of extracting and recovering the meaning of
messages. For accuracy, they have to be trained on a KB.
The KB plays an important role in provisioning the accuracy
of message meaning. Existing works assume that transceivers
of semantic communications share the same KB. However,
intelligent transceivers may suffer from the communication
burden or worry about privacy leakage to exchange data
in KBs. Besides, the transceivers may independently learn
from the environment and dynamically update their KBs,
leading to timely sharing of the KBs infeasible. All these
cause the mismatch between the KBs, which may result in
a semantic-level misunderstanding on the receiver side. Thus,
it is important to develop a semantic communication scheme
to mitigate the impact of the mismatch.
III. TRANSCEIVER COOPERATIVE LEARNING-AIDED
SEMANTIC COMMUNICATION SYSTEM FOR TEXT
TRANSMISSION
In this section, a transceiver cooperative learning-aided
semantic communication system to address the mismatch
between KBs is illustrated.
A. Transceiver Cooperative Learning-aided Semantic Com-
munication
The proposed TCL-SC is shown in Fig. 2. The transceivers
cooperatively train the encoding and decoding NNs of the
same structure based on their own KBs (i.e. transceiver self-
learning) and periodically share the parameters of NNs (i.e.
transceiver cooperative learning).
In the transceiver self-learning phase, the input data S ∈
ℜB×L as a dense vector goes through the semantic encod-
ing module, which extracts the semantic information X ∈
ℜB×L×D, with B being the batch size, L representing the
input data size, and D stands for the output dimension of
semantic encoding module. The JSCC encoding module then
maps X to the channel input symbols Z ∈ℜB×NL×2. The
encoded features in Z are transmitted to the receiver over
the wireless channel with noise, and the JSCC decoding
module decodes the noise-corrupted features ˆZ ∈ℜB×NL×2
to ˆX ∈ℜB×L×D. Finally, the semantic decoding module
recovers ˆX to ˆS ∈ℜB×L×D. The whole network learns in
an end-to-end manner. In the transceiver cooperative learning
phase, one transceiver (e.g. A) shares the network parameters
of the system model with the same architecture to the other
transceiver (e.g. B), and the network parameters of both
transceivers are aggregated on transceiver B. For simplicity,
the weight assigned to the model aggregation is set to be
propositional to the data sizes of the transceivers. Transceiver
B then sends the aggregated network parameters to transceiver
A, and the network parameters of both transceivers are up-
dated. The two phases alternate until the termination condition
is met.
Note that, TCL-SC1 could address the mismatch between
KBs of the transmitter and receiver skillfully, but it also
suffers from extra communication overhead. The communi-
cation overhead depends on the number of transmitted bits
as well as the communication rounds. Therefore to reduce
the communication overhead, one can either the number of
transmitted bits or that of the communication rounds.
B. Network Parameter Quantization
As aforementioned, a feasible way is to convert the weights
of the trained NNs from high-precision to low-precision. The
parameter compression can not only reduce the communica-
tion overhead of the parameter sharing but also can improve
the inference speed [11]. In [12], the authors proposed a
quantization approach that quantizes both weights and ac-
tivations from FP32 representation to INT8 representation.
The approach can reduce the model size without signiﬁcantly
degrading the model performance. Thus, we use the approach
proposed in [12] for the parameter sharing in TCL-SC. This
not only reduces the communication overhead, but also makes
the proposed TCL-SC suitable for devices with limited re-
sources.
C. Impact of The Number of Communication Rounds
Intuitively, reducing the number of communication rounds
can also reduce the communication overhead caused by
sharing parameters of NNs. However, the performance of
the proposed TCL-SC scheme may severely degrade with
the number of communication rounds. This is because the
performance of semantic communication systems may fall
into local optimality as the number of communication rounds
decreases. Hence, we expect to ﬁnd an appropriate value for
achieving a compromise between communication overhead
and performance.
The impact of the number of communication rounds on the
proposed TCL-SC performance is investigated in two cases.
• Case 1: The data perceived by transceiver A is different
that perceived by transceiver B, but the data size is
approximately equal, denoted as ∥A∥≈∥B∥.
• Case 2: The data perceived by transceiver A is different
that perceived by transceiver B, and the data size of
transceiver A is much larger than that of transceiver B,
denoted as ∥A∥≫∥B∥.
The impact of communication rounds is investigated by ex-
periments. In this article, text transmission experiments are
conducted. We select the dataset proceedings of the European
Parliament [13]. The dataset contains around 2 million sen-
tences and 50 million words. We pre-process the dataset and
select sentences consisting of 4 −30 words from it. In case
1, we divide the dataset into four parts: 10% as initial public
data, 40% as private data of transceiver A, 40% as private
data of transceiver B, and 10% as test data. In case 2, 60% is
the private data of transceiver A, 20% is the private data of
1Federated learning typically involves a large number of mobile devices
that are connected to a central server. However, in the proposed TCL-SC,
only two transceivers are considered.

4
Transceiver A
Transceiver B
Transceiver
self-learning
Transceiver
cooperative
learning
Model aggregation:
Wireless
Channel
B×L
B×L×D
B×L×D
B×L×2N
B×NL×2
B×L×2N
B×L×D
B×L
B×L×D
Semantic
Encoding
JSCC
Encoding
Embedding
Layer
Softmax
JSCC
Decoding
Semantic
Decoding
S
X
Z
Fig. 2. The framework of our proposed TCL-SC: (1) transceiver self-learning: the transceivers (e.g., A and B) train the semantic encoder and decoder of the
same structure based on their own KBs. In order to reduce the communication overhead in cooperative learning, network parameter quantization is introduced
to reduce the resolution of weights; (2) transceiver cooperative learning: the model parameters of transceivers A and B are aggregated on transceiver B. During
model aggregation, the weight (e.g., mA) assigned to the model is set according to the data size of the transceiver.
transceiver B, and the rest is unchanged. The proposed TCL-
SC scheme is trained over the additive white Gaussian noise
(AWGN) channels with a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of 15 dB
with a cross-entropy loss function. The total learning epochs
of the transceivers is 80, and the number of communication
rounds is set to 1, 4, 8, 10, 20, and 40, respectively. We adopt
bilingual evaluation understudy (BLEU) score [14] as the
performance metric. The BLEU score measures the similarity
between words, and its value ranges from 0 to 1. The larger the
value, the better the system performance. The BLEU scores
of the experiments with different numbers of communication
rounds are illustrated in Fig. 3.
It is observed that the addition of communication rounds
increases the performance initially in case 1. However, with
the increase of communication rounds to a certain number,
the performance is no longer signiﬁcantly improved. In case
2, the BLEU score has shown roughly the same tendency.
Experiment results suggest that the number of communication
rounds equal to 8 could provide a reasonable performance
compromise.
IV. PERFORMANCE COMPARISON AND DISCUSSIONS
In this section, the effectiveness of the proposed TCL-SC is
veriﬁed by comparing it with other semantic communication
scheme and the traditional source coding and channel coding
approach over the AWGN channels. The text transmission is
chosen for the experiment. It is noteworthy the proposed TCL-
SC scheme is not limited to the source type and can be applied
to semantic communication systems with any source type.
A. Experimental Setup
Dataset: The proceedings of the European Parliament [13]
is adopted to demonstrate the performance comparison. We
pre-process the dataset and select sentences consisting of 4−30
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Number of Communication Rounds
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
BLEU(1-grams)
AWGN Channel - SNR = 15dB
||A||>>||B||
Fig. 3. Impact of the number of communication rounds on the performance.
Initially, the addition of communication rounds increases performance, but
after a point, the gains stagnate.
words from it. Further, we divide the dataset into four parts:
10% as initial public data, 60% as private data of transceiver
A, 20% as private data of transceiver B, and 10% as test data.
Network: For fair comparisons, the network structures of
the transmitter and receiver in TCL-SC are the same as that
of DeepSC [4], where the semantic encoding and decoding
modules for extracting and recovering semantic information
are composed of Transformer encoder and decoder.
Baselines: A DL-enabled semantic communication scheme
and a traditional communication scheme are chosen as base-
lines.
• DeepSC [4]: DeepSC is a deep learning-based semantic
communication system, which extracts semantic informa-
tion from texts via the Transformer encoder and then

5
maps semantic information to the channel input. The loss
function of DeepSC is the cross-entropy.
• Separate source-channel coding scheme: We consider
Huffman coding for source coding. As for channel cod-
ing, we use Reed-Solomon (RS) coding [15]. The 16
quadrature amplitude modulation (16-QAM) is adopted.
It is noteworthy that the KB mismatch problem will
not affect the separate source-channel coding scheme,
because it aims to achieve perfect bit transmission.
Metrics: In addition to the BLEU score, we also adopt
sentence similarity [4] as performance metric. The sentence
similarity compares the difference between sentences. Similar
to the BLEU score, the sentence similarity ranges from [0, 1],
and the larger the value, the better the performance of the
communication system.
B. Experimental Results
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
SNR (dB)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
BLEU(1-grams)
DeepSC
Huffman+RS
TCL-SC
(a)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
SNR (dB)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
BLEU(2-grams)
DeepSC
Huffman+RS
TCL-SC
(b)
Fig. 4. BLEU score versus SNR, where both the DeepSC and TCL-SC are
trained over the AWGN channels at an SNR of 15 dB.
With the same number of transmitted symbols, we test the
BLEU score under different SNR over the AWGN channels, as
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
SNR (dB)
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
Sentence Similarity
DeepSC
Huffman+RS
TCL-SC
Fig. 5. Sentence similarity versus SNR, where both the DeepSC and TCL-SC
are trained over the AWGN channels at an SNR of 15 dB.
shown in Fig. 4. BLEU(1-gram) and BLEU(2-grams) calcu-
lated the 1-gram difference and 2-grams difference between
the transmitted and recovered sentences, respectively. Take
the sentence “the cat is on the sofa” for example, 1-gram:
“the”,“is”,“on”,“the”, and “sofa”, 2-gram: “the cat”,“cat is”,“is
on”,“on the”, and “the sofa”. Furthermore, take 2-grams as an
example, if the recovered sentence contains the above phrases
and the number is the same, then the BLEU score is 1.
As can be seen from Fig. 4.(a), the BLEU(1-gram) score of
the traditional communication scheme is higher than that of
DeepSC and the proposed TCL-SC when the SNR is greater
than 12 dB. This is because channel impairments are relatively
small. However, in the low SNR regime, the BLEU(1-gram)
score of the proposed TCL-SC achieved is higher than that
of the two baselines. In particular, the performance of the
proposed TCL-SC is much better than that of the DeepSC in
both low and high SNR regimes. In Fig. 4.(b), BLEU(2-grams)
score obtained by each scheme decreased slightly but has
shown roughly the same tendency with BLEU(1-gram) score.
These comparisons demonstrate that the existing semantic
communication schemes cannot cope with the mismatched
KBs, and the proposed TCL-SC could reduce the misunder-
standing on the receiver side caused by the mismatched KBs.
Notice that, the BLEU score is still the pursuit of the
accuracy of the symbol in essence, and it does not measure the
performance of the communication system from the semantic
level. For example, “sofa” is recovered to “lounges”, and
the BLEU score will drop, but in fact, the semantics have
not changed. In order to more appropriately measure the
performance of semantic communication system, in Fig. 5,
we show the relationship between sentence similarity and the
SNR for each scheme over the AWGN channels.
It can be observed that, at the high SNR, the sentence
similarity obtained by the traditional method is higher than
that obtained by the proposed TCL-SC. The sentence similarity
obtained by DeepSC is much smaller than that obtained by the
proposed TCL-SC. At the low SNR, the sentence similarity
obtained by the proposed TCL-SC is higher than that of the

6
comparison schemes. These comparisons further indicate that
our proposed TCL-SC could well cope with the mismatched
KBs in semantic communication systems, especially at the low
SNR.
V. FUTURE DIRECTIONS
While the proposed TCL-SC has been demonstrated to be
effective in combating mismatched KBs, there are still some
issues worth further investigation.
Imperfect transmission of NN parameters: As this article
focuses on addressing the mismatch between the KBs, in the
phase of transceiver cooperative learning, the transmission of
the NN parameters is assumed to be perfect. In practice, the
channel for NN parameter transmission is typically imperfect.
The noisy model parameter may greatly affect the performance
of TCL-SC. Therefore, the impact of noisy parameter trans-
mission on TCL-SC needs further investigation.
Data importance-based weights setting: For simplicity,
the weight in TCL-SC assigned to the model aggregation is
set to be propositional to the data sizes of the transceivers.
The data importance that describes the contributions to model
updates has been overlooked. In the future, the importance of
data can be reﬂected in the weighted model aggregation.
TCL-SC for multi-user communications: In this article,
we only considered point-to-point semantic communication.
In practice, a single transceiver can usually communicate
with multiple transceivers (e.g., transceiver A↔transceiver B,
transceiver C↔transceiver A). In the multi-transceiver com-
munication scenario, it is much more complicated to adopt
TCL-SC against the mismatched KBs. Thus, more research
efforts, such as how to avoid the semantic-level interference
of multi-transceivers cooperative learning and how to optimize
computing and communication resources, can be done on
TCL-SC in multi-user communication scenarios in future
work.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
This article proposed a TCL-SC scheme, where the
transceivers periodically share the network parameters of the
semantic encoder and decoder instead of directly exchang-
ing data. In TCL-SC, the network parameter quantization is
adopted to reduce the weights resolution, thus reducing the
communication overhead caused by sharing the parameters
of NNs. Furthermore, we studied the effect of the number
of communication rounds on TCL-SC. Experiments of text
transmission have demonstrated our proposed TCL-SC could
well reduce the misunderstanding on the receiver side caused
by the mismatched KBs, especially at the low SNR ratio
regime. Future research directions regarding TCL-SC were
discussed.
