Geometric-Facilitated Denoising Diffusion Model for 3D Molecule Generation
Can Xu1,2*†, Haosen Wang3,2*, Weigang Wang1†, Pengfei Zheng2, Hongyang Chen2‡
1Zhejiang Gongshang University
2Zhejiang Lab
3Southeast University

Abstract
Denoising diffusion models have shown great potential in
multiple research areas. Existing diffusion-based generative
methods on de novo 3D molecule generation face two major
challenges. Since majority heavy atoms in molecules allow
connections to multiple atoms through single bonds, solely
using pair-wise distance to model molecule geometries is in-
sufficient. Therefore, the first one involves proposing an ef-
fective neural network as the denoising kernel that is capa-
ble to capture complex multi-body interatomic relationships
and learn high-quality features. Due to the discrete nature of
graphs, mainstream diffusion-based methods for molecules
heavily rely on predefined rules and generate edges in an indi-
rect manner. The second challenge involves accommodating
molecule generation to diffusion and accurately predicting
the existence of bonds. In our research, we view the iterative
way of updating molecule conformations in diffusion process
is consistent with molecular dynamics and introduce a novel
molecule generation method named Geometric-Facilitated
Molecular Diffusion (GFMDiff). For the first challenge, we
introduce a Dual-Track Transformer Network (DTN) to fully
excevate global spatial relationships and learn high quality
representations which contribute to accurate predictions of
features and geometries. As for the second challenge, we de-
sign Geometric-Facilitated Loss (GFLoss) which intervenes
the formation of bonds during the training period, instead of
directly embedding edges into the latent space. Comprehen-
sive experiments on current benchmarks demonstrate the su-
periority of GFMDiff.
Introduction
Recent advances in deep generative methods, especially
diffusion-based methods (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Song
and Ermon 2019; Song et al. 2021), have greatly propelled
research in generative artificial intelligence across various
domains. In line with the development trend of generative
methods, mainstream approches in the field of molecule dis-
covery have undergone a transformation from previous gen-
erative methods to diffusion-based methods, and from de-
signing 2D graphs to 3D conformations. However, there are
*This work is done during internship at Zhejiang Lab.
†Equal contribution, co-first author.
‡Correspond to Hongyang Chen.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
two major challenges in 3D molecule generation. The first
one involves predicting accurate and stable molecule con-
formations while the other entails fully utilizing geomet-
ric information to facilitate the generation of discrete graph
structures. In this paper, we propose Geometric-Facilitated
Molecular Diffusion (GFMDiff), a de novo 3D molecule
generative method that addresses the aforementioned chal-
lenges. GFMDiff is capable of generating accurate 3D ge-
ometries while tackling the dicrete nature of graphs.
De novo molecule generation involves generating valid,
novel, and stable molecules. To address the quest for equiv-
ariance of generated 3D conformations, several diffusion-
based methods (Hoogeboom et al. 2022; Huang et al. 2023)
model molecules indirectly through atomic distances, which
directly reflet the strength of interatomic forces. However,
earlier methods (Hoogeboom et al. 2022) did not address the
complex interatomic relationships among multiple atoms.
While the others (Huang et al. 2023) simply use a threshold
to distinguish the influence caused by chemical bonds and
interatomic forces, regradlesss of specific atom and bond
types. However, apart from few atoms like fluorine, chlo-
rine, and bromine, majority heavy atoms in molecules al-
lows connecting to other atoms through single bonds. There-
fore, we consider simply using pair-wise distances to model
molecule geometries is far from sufficient. Recent research
(Yuan et al. 2023) also indicates that the contribution of bond
angles on molecular learning is equivalent to pair-wise dis-
tances. Only a limited number of methods make full use
of spatial information. Additionally, since molecular diffu-
sion methods only act on points cloud, traditional graph
convolutions are unable to discriminate the importance of
different atoms. In light of these challenges, we design a
novel dual track molecular learning framework named Dual-
Track Transformer Network (DTN). By integrating global
transformer architecture, DTN serves as the denoising kernel
to comprehensively capture spatial geometric information.
Given the excellent performance of diffusion models on
continuous data, majority of the models for molecule graph
generation adopt the diffusion and denoising approach on
Cartesian coordinates and features, followed by graph gener-
ation based on predefined rules instead of directly predicting
the existence of bonds. The manner in which graphs are gen-
erated indirectly can potentially lead to degradation in sta-
bilities and validity of generated samples. To make diffusion
arXiv:2401.02683v2  [cs.LG]  22 Apr 2024

Figure 1: An overview of GFMDiff. For each noise sample at arbitrary time step, the denoising kernel predicts atom types,
valencies, and coordinates through the DTN. A loss term named GFLoss that intervenes in the formation of bonds is added to
the training objective as well.
model applicable to multimodal data of molecules, several
studies (Niu et al. 2020; Vignac et al. 2023a,b) introduce ad-
jancency matrices to diffusion and denoising process. How-
ever, embedding graphs and edges into models leads to the
rise of computational cost. In our research, we view diffu-
sion model as a process that iteratively update atom infor-
mation according to local multi-body interatomic relation-
ship at each time step. Accurate feature learning assists on
precise predictions of molecule conformaitons. In order to
predict spot on molecule conformations, we devise a way by
mitigating the gap between embeddings and local geome-
tries during training. In this paper, we actively intervene the
formation of graphs with a delicately designed loss funtion
named Geometric-Facilitated Loss (GFLoss).
In this paper, we present Geometric-Facilitated Molec-
ular Diffusion (GFMDiff) for 3D molecule generation. In
contrast to previous methods that primarily learn atom repre-
sentations based-on pair-wise distances, we manage to effec-
tively incorporate triplet-wise geometric information along
with pair-wise distances into molecular learning. Most stud-
ies directly generate point clouds and subsequently complete
3D graph structures based on predefined rules. However, this
approach suffers from two major constraints. Firstly, the in-
direct manner of graph generation causes degradation of sta-
bility and validity of samples. Secondly, traditional graph
convolutions are not sufficient enough to distinguish local
and global information. To address the first constraint, we
proactively guide the formation of bonds during the train-
ing phase with a exquisite loss function named Geometric-
Facilitated Loss (GFLoss). As for the second constraint,
we introduce Dual-Track Transformer Network (DTN), a
global transformer-based neural network, to promote com-
prehensive geometric learning and local feature learning.
Main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• Comprehensive utilization of spatial information to cap-
ture multi-body interactions among atoms, which is cru-
cial for molecular learning and stabilities of generated
samples.
• Introduction of a carefully designed GFLoss to facilitate
the formation of bonds, addressing the discrete nature of
graphs in an efficient manner.
• Proposal of DTN as an alternative to global graph con-
volutions which enables the model to capture both global
and local information effectively.
Related Works
Diffusion Models
Diffusion-based methods arouse wide attention due to their
excellent performance in generative tasks across multiple
fields, such as computer vision (Avrahami, Lischinski, and
Fried 2022; Ho et al. 2022; Cai et al. 2020; Luo and Hu
2021), natural language processing (Hoogeboom et al. 2021;
Savinov et al. 2022), as well as various interdisciplinary
tasks (Shabani, Hosseini, and Furukawa 2023; Lei et al.
2023) et al.
The formation of human motion skeletons share similar-
ities to molecules, as both are represented by point clouds
connected by edges. The difference is that human motion
generation does not require predictions of edges. Building
upon DDPMs, MoFusion (Dabral et al. 2023) employs U-
Net (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015) as the backbone
for the denosing kernel in motion sequence synthesis. Apart
from applications on continuous data, many research efforts
are devoted to discete data generation. EDP-GNN (Niu et al.
2020) introduce Score SDEs, a learning paradigm of diffu-
sion models, to the generation of discrete graph adjancency
matrices.
Molecule Generation
Over the past years, various generative methods have been
employed for molecule generation, including variational
autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma and Welling 2022), nor-
malizing flows (NFs) (Dinh, Krueger, and Bengio 2015),

Figure 2: The illustration of Dual-Track Transformer Network (DTN). The atom-pair track and pair-triplet with multi-head
attention modules update atom and pair-wise features, respectively. The pair-wise and triplet-wise features are further fused
with the latest position information.
and generative adversarial network (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al. 2014). In order to generate 3D molecules, G-SchNet
(Gebauer, Gastegger, and Sch¨utt 2019) adopts an auto-
regressive model with a rotation invariant and local sym-
metrical network to add atoms incrementally. In the field
of computatinal chemistry, diffusion models, well-suited for
continuous data, are first introduced to conformation genera-
tion that takes molecule graphs as input and only operates on
atom coordinates. EDM (Hoogeboom et al. 2022) and MDM
(Huang et al. 2023) convert discrete atom features into one-
hot format to make generated samples more chemical fea-
sible and stable. In order to generate edges without relying
on predefined rules, Digress (Vignac et al. 2023a) and MiDi
(Vignac et al. 2023b) propose discrete diffusion techniques.
Preliminaries
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models
Diffusion models have garnered considerable attention as
powerful generative models. By learning the denoising ker-
nel of the reverse process, these models are able to uncover
underlying distributions of noisy samples. Given a piece of
data, the forward process, treated as a Markov chain, gradu-
ally adds Gaussian noises for T times to with learnable pa-
rameters controlling the strength of noises. During the gen-
erative process, the model reverses the noise back to the
original distribution of real data.
Diffusion Process
Let Gt(t = 0, 1, ..., T) denotes dis-
tributions of molecule geometry information and βt
∈
(0, 1), t = 0, 1, ..., T denote the variance schedule of the
Markov chain. Therefore we have the posterior distribution
of Gt:
q(G1:T |G0) = QT
t=1 q(Gt|Gt−1),
(1)
q(Gt|Gt−1) = N(Gt; √1 −βtGt−1, βtI).
(2)
As time step t rises, the variance schedule βt smoothly
transits from 0 to 1, which means more noise is added to the
original data distribution. Let ¯αt = Qt
s=1 αs = Qt
s=1(1 −
βs), the distribution of sample data
q(Gt|G0) = N(Gt; √¯αtG0, (1 −¯αt)I).
(3)
Denoising Process
During the denoising process, the
model manages to reconstruct the original geometry in-
formation by learning Markov kernels pθ(G0:T −1|GT ) =
QT
t=1 pθ(Gt−1|Gt) close to the actual reverse process
q(Gt−1|Gt). The distribution of learned parameterized dy-
namics at each time step is:
pθ(Gt−1|Gt) = N(Gt−1; µθ(Gt, t), σ2
t I),
(4)
where µθ(Gt, t) is the neural network to approximate the
means and σ2
t =
(βt−βt−1)βt−1
(1−βt−1)βt
is the predefined variance
schedule. Initially, the pθ(Gt) is sampled from a standard
Guassian distribution. Then the geometry information and
atom features get polished over the reverse process itera-
tively.
Theoretically, the training objective takes the form of the
variational lower bound of log-likelihood of data:
logp(G) ≥Lbase + PT
t=0 Lt,
(5)
Lbase = −KL(q(GT |G0)|p(GT )),
(6)
Lt = KL(q(Gt−1|Gt)|p(Gt−1|Gt)).
(7)
However, it is found out that predicting the Guassian noise
ϵ makes it easier for the neural network training. Therefore,
Lt (Kingma et al. 2021) takes the form of
Lt = Eϵt∼N(0,I)
1
2(1 −SNR(t −1)
SNR(t)
)||ϵt −ˆϵt||2

. (8)
Methodology
In this section, we provide details of our proposed molecule
generation framework, including the E(n) equivariant de-
noising kernel, Geometric-Facilitated loss, the forward
and reverse process, and the optimization objective. The
overview of GFMDiff is shown in Fig 1. At each time step,
molecule conformations are sampled as inputs. The DTN en-
sures complete utilization of molecule geometries by taking
pair-wise distances and triplet-wise angles as inputs. These
two kinds of features each stand for interatomic forces and
multi-body interactions. The incorporation of GFLoss fur-
ther guarantees the reasonableness and soundness of gener-
ated samples.

Dual-Track Transformer Network
In this subseciton, we elaborate on Dual-Track Trans-
former Network (DTN) as the E(n) equivariant backbone
of GFMDiff. DTN is designed to effectively capture inter-
atomic relationships and atom features. Since 3D molecular
geometries possess invariance properties such as rotations,
translations, reflections, and permutations, it is essential for
the denoising kernel to satisfy such properties. The proposed
DTN is not only E(n) equivariant, but also able to fully lever-
ages spatial information.
In our proposed method, we regard an input molecule with
the total number of atoms N as G = (P, X, A, V ), where
P = (p1, p2, ..., pN) ∈RN×3 represents atom coordinates,
X = (x1, x2, ..., xN) ∈RN×nf represents one-hot encod-
ing of atomic numbers, A = (a1, a2, ..., aN) ∈RN rep-
resents atomic numbers, and V = (v1, v2, ..., vN) ∈RN
stands for valencies of atoms. To ensure the quest for the
equivariance, DTN utilizes pair-wise distances and triplet-
wise angles to capture the geometry information. The Eu-
clidean distance between atom i and j, which reflects the
strength of interatomic force, is obtained by:
dij = ||pi −pj||2.
(9)
Given the complicated relationships among atoms during the
sampling phase, simply using pair-wise distances is insuffi-
cient to excevate spatial information. Therefore, we further
calculate the triplet-wise angle using:
φijk = arccos

(pi −pj) × (pi −pk)
||pi −pj||2 × ||pi −pk||2

.
(10)
The above geometric calculations allow us to further fea-
turize local geometries through radius basis function (RBF)
network:
eij = Linear(RBF(dij), ei, ej),
(11)
eijk = Linear(RBF(φijk), ei, ej, ek),
(12)
where ei = Embedding(xi, ai, vi) is the node embedding
of atom i that combines atomic numbers and valencies.
These features are later fed into DTN with L layers.
Each layer of DTN consists of the following components,
an atom-pair track, a pair-triplet track, and a connection
module. The atom-pair track simulates the influence of in-
teratomic forces on atoms while the pair-triplet track mod-
els the impact of potential bond angles on edges. Just as its
name implies, the connection module serves at the brige be-
tween two tracks to promote better representation learning
by injecting atom features back to pair-wise features.
The atom-pair track involves predicting influences of
other atoms and interatomic forces on target atoms. The
track takes atom embeddings ei and pair embeddings eij as
inputs:
ei = LayerNorm(ei), eij = LayerNorm(eij),
(13)
Qi = Linear(ei), Ki = Linear(ei) + Linear(eij),(14)
ai = Dropout(softmax QiKT
i
√dh ),
(15)
Vi = Linear(eij) + Linear(ei) + Linear(ej),
(16)
ˆei = Linear(aiVT
i ),
(17)
Figure 3: The illustration of GFLoss. We leverages chemical
rules to predict the existence of bonds and then calculate
potential valencies based on probabilities of atom types and
bond predictions. The loss minimizes the difference between
valencies predicted by DTN and valencies calculated from
molecule geometries.
where dh is the number of heads. Atom embeddings first
get updated by adding predictions of atom-pair track and are
later passed to a feed forward network. In each layer, atom
absorbs aggregated representations of other atoms and cor-
responding atom pairs.
Similarly, the pair-triplet track predicts the impact of
complex geometry substructures on interatomic forces. It is
worth noting that triplet embeddings eijk does not get up-
dated in the transformer structure, because this would signif-
icantly increase the quest for computaional resources. They
only get updated whenever atom coordinates are renewed.
The connection module serves as the role that fuse atom
embeddings into pair embeddings. For pair embedding eij,
it absorbs atomic feature information from the connection
module and local spatial information from the pair-triplet
track at the same time.
eij = LayerNorm (eij + Linear(Linear(ei) ⊗Linear(ej)))
(18)
In terms of the approach to update coordinates, we fol-
low the design of PosUpdate module in EDM (Hoogeboom
et al. 2022) and MDM (Huang et al. 2023). At the end of
each layer, pair-wise and triplet-wise embeddings get up-
dated since molecule conformations are altered:
eij = Linear

Linear(RBF( ˆdij), ˆeij), ˆei, ˆej

,
(19)
eijk = Linear (RBF( ˆφijk), eijk) .
(20)
Geometric-Facilitated Loss
Predicting the existence of bonds is a fundamental and indis-
pensable task in molecule graph generation. Unlike previous
reserch that heavily relies on predefined rules, we propose
to actively intervened in bond formation during the train-
ing process by designing a delicate training objective term

Type
Method
NLL↓
Atom
Stability (%) ↑
Mol
Stability (%) ↑
Validity (%) ↑
Uniqueness·Validity (%) ↑
NF
E-NF
-59.7
85.0
4.9
40.2
39.4
AR
G-SchNet
N/A
95.7
68.1
85.5
80.3
DDPM
EDM
-110.7±1.5
98.7±0.1
82.0±0.4
91.9±0.5
90.7±0.6
Bridge+Force
N/A
98.8±0.1
84.6±0.3
N/A
N/A
GCDM
-171.0±0.2
98.7±0.0
85.7±0.4
94.8±0.2
93.3±0.0
GeoLDM
N/A
98.9±0.1
89.4±0.5
93.8±0.4
92.7±0.5
Ours
GFMDiff
w/o tri
-123.1±0.4
98.7±0.1
85.9±0.2
94.9±0.2
94.2±0.2
GFMDiff
w/o GFLoss
-127.5±0.4
98.7±0.0
86.5±0.1
95.2±0.0
94.5±0.0
GFMDiff
-128.0±0.2
98.9±0.0
87.7±0.2
96.3±0.3
95.1±0.2
Data
99.0
95.2
97.7
97.7
Table 1: Performance comparison on GEOM-QM9. Results of 10000 generated samples are reported with standard deviations
across 3 runs using different seeds.
Figure 4: Molecule samples generated by GFMDiff for GEOM-QM9
named Geometric-Facilitated Loss (GFLoss). The inten-
tion of this loss function is to guide the model in generat-
ing molecules that not only possess valid topological struc-
tures but also stable conformations. We consider the valen-
cies of atoms to be the an type of auxiliary features of great
importance in molecule generation. Therefore, valencies of
atoms are incorporated as part of atom features in the aboved
metioned DTN. The cross validation of valencies allows the
model to establish close connections between geometries
and validity.
According to the predefined rules, atom pairs with proper
distances are considered to be connected by bonds. For sin-
gle, double, or triple bond, there are typical distances be-
tween certain atoms. If the distance between a pair of atoms
is in certain range, these two atoms are considered to be con-
nect by corresponding type of bond. Let the predefined dis-
tances and margins to be D ∈Rnf×nf×3 and M ∈R3,
where 3 stands for the number of bond types. Based on out-
puts of DTN ˆGt = ( ˆPt, ˆXt, ˆAt, ˆVt), we first predict the
probabilities of atom types using a softmax function:
pt( ˆXatom) = softmax( ˆXt) ∈RN×nf,
(21)
where ˆXt here represents the predicted atom types in one-
hot format with the dimension of nf. The probabilities of
pair-wise atom types are
pt( ˆXpair) = pt( ˆXatom) · pt( ˆXatom) ∈RN×N×nf×nf.
(22)
With the predicted atom coordinates ˆPt, pair-wise dis-
tance matrix dt ∈RN×N can be obtained and is expanded
to RN×N×nf×nf×3 for convenience. Then the margin mt
between pair-wsie distances and typical bond distancess is:
mt = dt −(D + M) ∈RN×N×nf×nf×3.
(23)
Take atom i and j for an example, suppose their chances
to be Carbon are above zero, if any element in margin
mt(i, j, C, C, :) ∈R3 is below zero, it indicates the pres-
ence of a bond between atom i and j. Specific type of
bond is determined by the index of the minimum value
in mt(i, j, C, C, :). If arg min(mt(i, j, C, C, :)) is 1, then
they are connected by a single bond. They are connected by
a triple bond if arg min(mt(i, j, C, C, :)) happen to be 3.
The boolean matrix that represents the existence of bonds is
noted as ISBONDt ∈RN×N×nf×nf
Once we have the probabilities of pair-wise atom types
and the existence of bonds, the probable valencies of atoms
could be estimated as:
ˆVpred(t) = sum(pt( ˆXpair) ⊙ISBONDt) ∈RN.
(24)
Since input data are fused with different level of noises,
GFLoss is fomulated as the mean square error between the
predicted valencies Vpred and the ground-truth valencies V :
Lt = Eϵt∼N(0,I)
  1
2ω(t)(||ϵt −ˆϵt||2 + λLGF (t))

,(25)
LGF (t) = ||αt( ˆVpred(t) −Vt)||2,
(26)
where αt is the level of ground-truth data in a piece of noisy
input in diffusion process and ω(t) = (1−SNR(t)/SNR(t−
1)).

Task
Units
α
Bohr3
∆ε
meV
εHOMO
meV
εLUMO
meV
µ
D
Cv
cal
molK
Naive (Upper-bound)
9.01
1470
645
1457
1.616
6.857
# Atom
3.86
866
426
813
1.053
1.971
EDM
2.76
655
356
584
1.111
1.101
GCDM
1.97
602
344
479
0.844
0.689
GeoLDM
2.37
587
340
522
1.108
1.025
GFMDiff
1.74
558
321
430
0.728
0.593
QM9 (Lower-bound)
0.10
64
39
36
0.043
0.040
Table 2: Performance comparison for conditioned molecule generation on QM9. With conditioned samples, Results are in the
form of mean absolute error (MAE) for property prediction of 10000 conditional samples by an EGNN classifier.
Figure 5: Generated samples of GFMDiff on QM9 conditioned with increasing values of α
Experiments
In this section, we report the performance comparison of
GFMDiff on GEOM-QM9 (Ramakrishnan et al. 2014) and
GEOM-Drugs (Axelrod and Gomez-Bombarelli 2022). Re-
sults on three current benchmarks indicate that our method
outperforms state-of-the-art (SOTA) models in multiple as-
pacts.
Setup
In order to make comprehensive comparisons, we conduct
experiments on two benchmark datasets in molecule gener-
ation: GEOM-QM9 (Ramakrishnan et al. 2014) and GEOM-
Drugs (Axelrod and Gomez-Bombarelli 2022). GEOM-
QM9 dataset consists of over 130K molecules and their cor-
responding conformations, where molecules have 18 atoms
with hydrogen included on average. GEOM-Drugs includes
over 450K molecules and 37M conformations, where size of
molecule is 44 on average.
To assess the performance of GFMDiff in a fair and com-
prehensive manner, we compare it against six representative
baselines in this fiels, which are E-NF (Garcia Satorras et al.
2021), G-SchNet (Gebauer, Gastegger, and Sch¨utt 2019),
EDM (Hoogeboom et al. 2022), models of Wu et al. (Gong
et al. 2022), GCDM (Morehead and Cheng 2023), and Ge-
oLDM (Xu et al. 2023). We refer to the performances of the
first three models stated in EDM, as well as results of the
remaining baselines reported in GCDM and GeoLDM.
In terms of evaluation metrics, we adopt the same ones
used in previous research, which are stability, validity, and
uniqueness. Stability measures the proportion of atoms with
correct valencies and molecules whose atoms are all stable.
Validity is defined as the percentage of molecules that are
theoretically correct and uniqueness shows the probability
of non-repetitive samples. Arrows in Table 1 and Table 3
signify the preferred direction of each criteria. The best re-
sults are highlightened in bold and the second best results
are underlined.
De Novo Molecule Generation on QM9
In order to analyze results fairly, we use the same dataset
settings as previous methods. To evaluate the effectiveness
of GFLoss and triplet geometric information learning, we
includes GFMDiff w/o GFLoss and GFM w/o tri for com-
parison. In GFM w/o tri, we replace the pair-triplet track
multi-head attention module with a self-attention module of
pair-wise features. The weight for GFLoss λ is set 0.01. On
QM9, GFMDiff is trained for around 1000 epochs, with a
five layer DTN and the embedding size of 256.
As it is shown in Table 1, GFMDiff outperforms all base-
lines and achieves the best performance in stability, validity,
and uniqueness times validity. GFMDiff and recent SOTA
methods show no major difference in stability of atoms,
but the performance lead of GFMDiff over the second-best
method using the same generative methods in terms of sta-
bility of molecules is 2.1%. This indicates that our model
is capable of genrating stable molecules. We believe that
the molecule stabilty could be further improved using latent
diffusion in GeoLDM. The performance lead of GFMDiff
over the SOTA method in validity and validity times unique-
ness is 1.1% and 1.3%, respectively. The superior perfor-
mance in validity means that GFMDiff generates molecules
not only with accurate conformations, but also with correct
valid and unique structres. It is intriguing to find out that
GFMDiff exhibits lower performance in terms of the nega-
tive log-likelihood of data (NLL) compared to GCDM, but
still surpasses other baselines. A possible explanation could

Type
Method
Atom Stable (%) ↑
Mol Stable (%) ↑
Normalizing flow
E-NF
75.0
0
DDPM
EDM
81.3
0.0
Bridge+Force
82.4±0.8
0.0
GCDM
86.4±0.2
3.7±0.3
GeoLDM
84.4
3.2
Ours
GFMDiff
86.5±0.2
3.9±0.2
Data
86.5
2.8
Table 3: Performance comparison on GEOM-Drugs. Results of 10000 generated samples are reported with standard deviations
across 3 runs using different seeds.
Figure 6: Molecule samples generated by GFMDiff for GEOM-Drugs
be the different ways of applying geomteric information be-
tween GFMDiff and GCDM.
Moreover, the ablations of GFLoss and triplet-wise ge-
omtery illustrate the effectiveness of them. Among GFMDiff
and its abalation models, GFMDiff w/o tri achieves the low-
est results. This means the incorporation of complete local
geometry information contributes more to the performance
lift than GFLoss. In summary, GFMDiff exhibits the ability
to generate stable molecules while addressing validities of
samplessimultaneously.
Conditional Molecule Generation on GEOM-QM9
For conditional molecule generation on QM9, we compare
our GFMDiff with existing methods along with naive base-
lines. In Table 2, we show the comparison of MAE on prop-
erty prediction task. The ”Naive (Upper-bound)” is a base-
line where samples and labels are shuffled and the ”#Atoms”
is the property prdiction method which simply relies of the
number of atoms. Lower mean absolute errors of a model
than these two baselines indicate the model is capable to
incorporate properties and molecule conformation informa-
tion into generated samples.
As it is demonstrated in Table 2, our methods outperforms
the state-of-the-art method in this task. Samples of samples
with various values of α is shown in Figure 5 as well. The
performence lead of GFMDiff over the second-best method
on for 6 properies are 11.7%, 4.9%, 6.2%, 10.2%, 13.7%,
and 13.9%, respectively. Results indicates the superiority of
our GFMDiff in generate molecules with desirable proper-
ties.
De Novo Molecule Generation on GEOM-Drugs
It is a challenging task to generate molecules for GEOM-
Drugs dataset, since it is a large scale dataset of big
molecules with up to 181 atoms. The relatively large scale
of molecules and low stabilities of ground truth data bring
huge challenges to 3D molecule generation. In experiments
on GEOM-Drugs, we compares GFMDiff with E-NF, EDM,
Bridge + Force, GCDM, and GeoLDM. Since current meth-
ods performs poorly in the novelty of molecules, we only list
the stability of generated samples for comparison.
Due to the size of molecules in GEOM-Drugs, the sta-
bility of ground truth data are much lower than that in
QM9. The proposed GFMDiff outperforms GCDM in terms
of atom stability by a small margin, while GFMDiff out-
performs the second-best result on molecule stability by
5.4%. It’s worth noting that GeoLDM, which generates sam-
ples with high stabilities on QM9, encounters a bottleneck
in generating large molecules. Some samples generated by
GFMDiff are shown in Figure 6. Results on Drugs also
demonstrate the capability of our proposed GFMDiff to gen-
erate stable molecule geometries.
Conclusion
In this paper, we propose GFMDiff, a novel molecule gener-
ation methods that fully excevates geometric information to
help expressive representation learning and accurate bonds
formation in molecule graphs. Unlike earlier methods that
did not comprehensively model molecular geometries and
heavily rely on predefined rules to generate bonds, GFMDiff
makes full use of spatial information to assist on represen-
tation learning and facilitate accurate edge generation. We
adopt DTN as the denoising kernel to update atom features
and coordinates based on interatomic forces and multi-body
interactions. The GFLoss is also implemented to actively
intervene the formation of bonds during each time step at
the training stage. We conduct comprehensive experiments
to evaluate the effectiveness and performance edge of the
proposed techniques over SOTA methods. It is shown that
GFMDiff is capable to generate valid molecules with accu-
rate conformations and correct atom valencies.
