Real-time Interface Control with Motion Gesture
Recognition based on Non-contact Capacitive Sensing
Hunmin Lee
Department of Computer Science
Georgia State University
Atlanta, GA 30302

Jaya Krishna Mandivarapu
Department of Computer Science
Georgia State University
Atlanta, GA 30302

Nahom Ogbazghi
Department of Computer Science
Georgia State University
Atlanta, GA 30302

Yingshu Li
Department of Computer Science
Georgia State University
Atlanta, GA 30302

Abstract
Capacitive sensing is a prominent technology that is cost-effective and low power
consuming with fast recognition speed compared to existing sensing systems. On
account of these advantages, Capacitive sensing has been widely studied and com-
mercialized in the domains of touch sensing, localization, existence detection, and
contact sensing interface application such as human-computer interaction. How-
ever, as a non-contact proximity sensing scheme is easily affected by the distur-
bance of peripheral objects or surroundings, it requires considerable sensitive data
processing than contact sensing, limiting the use of its further utilization. In this
paper, we propose a real-time interface control framework based on non-contact
hand motion gesture recognition through processing the raw signals, detecting the
electric ﬁeld disturbance triggered by the hand gesture movements near the capac-
itive sensor using adaptive threshold, and extracting the signiﬁcant signal frame,
covering the authentic signal intervals with 98.8% detection rate and 98.4% frame
correction rate. Through the GRU model trained with the extracted signal frame,
we classify the 10 hand motion gesture types with 98.79% accuracy. The frame-
work transmits the classiﬁcation result and maneuvers the interface of the fore-
ground process depending on the input. This study suggests the feasibility of intu-
itive interface technology, which accommodates the ﬂexible interaction between
human to machine similar to Natural User Interface, and uplifts the possibility
of commercialization based on measuring the electric ﬁeld disturbance through
non-contact proximity sensing which is state-of-the-art sensing technology.
1
Introduction
Capacitive proximity sensing quantitatively measures the variation of Electric Field (EF) around
a sensor based on the EF disturbance which is physically triggered from a dialectic object or
conductor nearby.
Through EF disturbance caused by peripheral objects, it provides a novel
methodology to be utilized in diverse domains by detecting target signals and controlling the
machines through digitalization.
Among the two main capacitive sensing mechanisms [1, 2]:
contact sensing and non-contact sensing, our focus lies on non-contact proximity sensing. In this
paper, we propose an automated real-time hand motion gesture detection and classiﬁcation system
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2201.01755v1  [cs.HC]  5 Jan 2022

Fig. 1. Framework overview: Our proposed Motion Gesture Recognition System using non-contact capacitive
sensing.
which controls the application’s User Interface (UI) where the gesture classiﬁcation output results
will be used to control the UI. The architecture is composed of the following activities: extracting
raw signals from sensors, signal processing, motion gesture detection, gesture frame extraction,
gesture classiﬁcation with a GRU classiﬁer, and socket communication to control the foreground
process of UI. Each step in the framework is selected with an optimal mechanism after thorough
step-wise analysis in order to acquire efﬁciency and feasibility, considering the future utilization
in applications to control their UI through physical hand motion gestures. In our experiments, we
collected the hand motion gesture data from the capacitive sensors and derived 10 gesture type
datasets (totally 1000 datasets) from three subjects in our GitHub [3] to be accessed by the public.
Our experimental results validate our approach with a 98.8% detection rate, 98.4% extraction rate,
and 98.79% accuracy in classiﬁcation. Fig.1 displays the overall pipeline of our proposed system.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
1. This paper presents an end-to-end pipeline and step-wise evaluation for an automated & real-time
interface control system with hand motion gesture recognition based on non-contact capacitive
sensing.
To evaluate the performance of the proposed architecture, multiple experiments were
conducted over the datasets acquired for this scenario on three metrics: detection rate, frame
extraction rate, and gesture classiﬁcation accuracy.
2. Our end-to-end system presents the controllability of User Interface which suggests the feasibility
of new product commercialization in the domains of IoT, HCI (Human-Computer Interaction), NUI
(Natural User Interface), and HMI (Human Machine Interface) through non-contact proximity sens-
ing with low cost, low computation, and low latency compared to the existing sensing mechanisms.
3. We open-sourced our established benchmark dataset and algorithm design through Github [3] for
further development progress of capacitive sensing systems through crowdsourcing.
This paper is organized as follows. In further parts of this section, we address the footprints of
non-contact capacitive sensing applications by reviewing the existing studies. In Section 2, we in-
troduce our methodology, implementing signal processing mechanisms by thoroughly analyzing the
extracted signals from our designed capacitive sensing system from multiple perspectives. We also
propose the adaptive threshold in order to detect and extract the signal frame which covers the rele-
vant signals. Section 3 presents the Deep Learning classiﬁer to train and categorize the signals into
the right gesture. Furthermore, we implement the classiﬁer to control the UI and suggest its po-
tential usability. In section 4, we evaluate our system ramiﬁcation performance through conducting
multiple experiments with three metrics. Finally, we conclude our paper by presenting conclusions
and future works.
1.1
Related Works and Motivation
As the major objective in capacitive sensing is utilization, a variety of new applications have been
designed and implemented upon prominent domains. Capacitive sensing can be categorized into
two major ﬁelds: contact sensing and non-contact sensing. Diverse researches have been conducted
2

in capacitive contact sensing [4, 5, 6, 7], and remarkable approaches have emerged that progressed
the usability of capacitive sensing. The capacitive touch sensing technology has been successfully
introduced as a low-cost and effective method to control the interface of IT devices and other con-
troller systems. In addition, contact sensing has widely been utilized in the ﬁeld of Health care [8]
to monitor the electric signals from our body such as electrocardiogram [9, 10], electromyography
[11], and electroencephalography. Moreover, some systems that detect a person’s existence and
compute the localization through capacitive sensing have been devised in [12-15]. Diverse stud-
ies were performed regarding hand motion detection, especially implementing visual processing
techniques based on the footage or image recognition through image sensors [16-23]. Recently, as
capacitive sensing tends to be more cost-effective in computational perspective compared to image
sensing, the current research trends are shifting towards capacitive sensing to obtain an accurate and
efﬁcient methodology to recognize hand motions. Wong et. al. [6] designed a wearable capacitive
sensing unit, sensing the capacitive values through attaching sensors to a hand and recognizing a
speciﬁc hand gesture using a machine learning model. Similarly, Kalpattu et. al. [7] developed a
gesture recognition glove device that utilizes capacitive sensors to extract voltage signals, perceiving
a certain hand gesture. Likewise, most systems that detect hand motions imply recognizing static
motions with certain hand forms such as thumbs-up pose, pouch pose, open-hand pose, or American
sign language (ASL) [6, 7, 12, 24, 25].
On the other hand, our hand gesture focuses on capturing dynamic motions in a non-contactive fash-
ion such as waving a hand in different directions. Aezinia et. al. [26, 27] implemented three copper
plates to measure the amplitude when a ﬁnger is nearby, and observed the EF difference around the
plates, suggesting the feasibility of a motion tracking system through capacitive sensing. Arshad et.
al. [28] conducted a study to track a person’s existence through capacitive proximity sensing where
the sensed signals contain distinct uniqueness which is sufﬁcient enough to determine the existence
of a speciﬁc person based on their experiments. Chu et. al. [29, 30] suggested a possibility of uti-
lizing a neural network and Hidden Markov Model to recognize hand gesture EF signals. However,
their study does not have thorough experimental validation, which lacks practical feasibility. Jung et.
al. [31, 32] designed a signal offset computation method for accurate zero setting and calculated the
empirical threshold of the EPS (Electric Potential Sensor) capacitive sensor. In addition, this study
is based on our past studies [33, 34] which presented the dynamic threshold and frame extraction
based on EPS capacitive sensor, classifying four-hand gesture types through the CNN model.
1.2
System Overview
Our system contains four capacitive sensors in the form of copper plates followed by middleware as
shown in Fig.1. All the signal data and information from the sensors were collected using Arduino
devices. Once the data are collected, they will be automatically passed through the pipeline of
different pre-processing steps involving signal processing, signal detection, and frame extraction
computations. Once the data processing pipeline ﬁnishes, pre-trained neural network models will
determine the gesture type of the incoming authentic gesture dataset. As part of the ﬁnal step for
any kind of inference or usage of this system in the real-time scenario, we implemented the system
into a python-based GUI framework that is being controlled based on the classiﬁcation output of the
neural network for an activity near the sensors.
2
Problem Formulation and Methodology
2.1
Computing Optimal Threshold through Signal Analysis
In this section, we analyze the extracted raw sensor signals and compute the optimal threshold by
interpreting the internal properties. As EF signals can be easily inﬂuenced by the surrounding envi-
ronment which causes unstable disturbances or noises in our data collection, our primary objective
is to detect the relevant signals by reducing the intrinsic noises as humanly as possible. In general,
there are two main perspectives to diminish noises: a) hardwarical approach such as designing the
circuital structure b) applying the mathematical ﬁltering computation that could magnify the tar-
get signals more distinctive based on software perspective. In the following sections, our aim is
to discover the optimal softwarical approach to effectively avoid noises, suggesting an algorithmic
resolution based on property analysis.
3

2.2
Capacitive Theories
In order to design a comprehensive framework by interpreting the fundamental background, com-
prehending the physical theories behind the capacitive sensing is essential [1]. A capacitive sensor
measures the mutual capacitance interacting with nearby objects. Let s = {(si)}N
i=1 be a set of sensors
where n(S
∀i si) = N. The total self-capacitance C = P
∀i ci, where ci indicates each sensor’s (si)
capacitance since they are connected in parallel, and based on Q(o,s) = CV , C = ϵAs
d(o,s) . ϵ denotes
the dielectric constant, o is an object, d indicates a distance and As is the overlapping area between
sensor s and a nearby object. Our ﬁnal measurement V can be approximated to Equation (1) where
Q denotes the amount of charges.
V ≈
[
∀s
Vs s.t. Vs ≈
Q(o,s)
ϵ·As
d(o,s)
(1)
2.3
Signal Processing
1. Signal Analysis
Let xi be our raw input signal. Xs = {x(s,i)|1 ≤s ≤4, (s,i) ∈N} and I = {i|1 ≤i ≤
n(Xs)} where n(X∃s) = n(I), and i is an index of input x. Based on our empirical signal
observation, the internal range of
x(s,i)
 is
x(s,i)
 −C ≤
x(s,i)
 ≤
x(s,i)
 + C, with C =
σ
x(s,i)


≈2.03 when there are no disturbances from the surrounding environment, where
σ denotes the standard deviation and the unit is voltage V . Compared with this inherent
oscillation, when a certain hand gesture takes place near a sensor with the vertical height
of 0.1∼15cm, the signal amplitude has the form of non-linear relation between the distance
and amplitude based on the coulomb’s law F = ke
|q1q2|
r2 , where ke is the Coulomb’s constant,
q1 and q2 denote the magnitudes of charges, and r is the distance between q1 and q2.
Another property of a capacitive sensor is that it periodically discharges the internal charges
as the sensor absorbs the electrons through nearby substances such as air and objects, when
it surpasses the intrinsic capacity ωs, having |xs| = Pp
i=1 |qi|, where p indicates a certain
period, and at p +1, x(x,i=p+1) = Pq
i=1 |qi −ωs|. The relation of xs is as follows in Equation
(2).
|x(s,i′ )| ≪|x(s,i′ +p)| and |x(s,i′ +p)| ≫|x(s,i′ +p+1)| s.t. |x(s,i+p)| ≈ωs and |x(s,i+p)| > ωs
(2)
In Equation (2), i + p indicates the moment of the discharge, and i + p + 1 denotes the
certain period after the discharge. p is determined based on the variation of signal ∆xs, and
our system displays p ≈1499.4 (±7.65), that is 19.6 (±0.10) seconds when the sampling
rate is 76.5 Hz, with σ
x(s,i′ )
 ≈11 ± 4.73. The reason for p∀s are identical is that A∀s
are equivalent. However, X∀s have their own values, with µ(Xs) 0 µ

Xs′

where s ,
s′, but σ (Xs) ≈σ

Xs′

, which implies that the overall range of difference is equivalent.
Another property is that x(s,i) starts off from its distinct range, indicating the potential
energy it possesses. Furthermore, µ

˜X(s,j,j′)

0 µ

˜X(s,j′ ,j)

which entails that the overall
amplitude of signal amplitude alters throughout the time where ˜X∈X, having X = S
∀j ˜Xj,
and j and j
′ are both indexes of ˜X. Due to these diversities, setting the average values to
zero is constantly required to reduce heterogeneity, by computing the offset λs of each s,
which we will introduce in Section 3.1.
2. Frequency Analysis
By mapping our time-series dataset into the frequency domain, it offers the intuition of
comprehending the intrinsic frequency components and insight to manipulate the frequency
range using ﬁltering mechanisms. Using the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) in Equation
(3), where f(x) is an input signal, F(u) is a linear aggregation of continuous periodical
function cos2πux + vsin2πux, a term encompassing v denotes an imaginary number, and
4

(a)
(b)
Fig. 2. FFT result: (a) without hand gestures; (b) with hand gestures (Left to Right).
TABLE. 1. Statistical comparison
Statistic
Gesture
1:100
100:200
200:300
300:400
400:500
µ( ˆx(s,j))
F
7.3 (±2.8)
1.1 (±0.1)
1.1 (±0.1)
0.8 (±0.1)
0.8 (±0.1)
σ( ˆx(s,j))
F
16.2 (±4.7)
0.7 (±0.1)
0.9 (±0.1)
0.5 (±0.1)
0.5 (±0.1)
µ( ˆx(s,j))
T
16.59 (±2.0)
1.4 (±0.1)
1.3 (±0.1)
0.9 (±0.0)
0.9 (±0.0)
σ( ˆx(s,j))
T
35.95 (±6.3)
0.7 (±0.1)
1.0 (±0.0)
0.5 (±0.0)
0.5 (±0.0)
u indicates a frequency. Fig.2(a) displays the FFT decomposition result when no hand
gesture is presented and Fig.2(b) shows the transformed signal when multiple hand gestures
are presented.
F(u) =
Z ∞
−∞
f (x)(cos2πux + vsin2πux)dx
(3)
The result in Fig.2 indicates that both raw signal without hand gesture (a), and the hand
motion gesture signal (b) contain a signiﬁcant amount of amplitudes in frequency range of
under 50Hz. When computing the statistics: mean (µ(·)) and standard deviation (σ(·)) by
the different ranges of frequencies, where 1
4
P4
s=1(σ(x(s,j))), 1
4
P4
s=1(µ(xs,j)) in frequency
range of [an,bn] are given in Table 1, with S5
n=1 an = {1,100,200,300,400|a1≤n≤5} and
S5
n=1 bn = {100,200,300,400,500|b1≤n≤5}. For example, 1:100 in the ﬁrst row in Table 1
indicates the frequency range of [1,100] Hz, and its statistics in the identical column below
are the values after the band-pass ﬁlter where the passband is [1, 100] Hz.
3. Processing Input Signal
In order to effectively reduce internal noises, we consider the following three signal pro-
cessing methods: Low Pass Filter (LPF), differentiation by sensors, and differentiation
by sequential time step.
As internal frequencies of input signals are usually dense in
the range of ultra-low frequency, ﬁltering the signals with LPF that has 50 cut-off fre-
quency f is a practical technique, which permits F(u ≤f ) in Equation (1) and reverts by
Pf
u=0 F(u) = f ( ¯x(s,j)) where f ( ¯x(s,j)) ∈f (x(s,j)). The major drawback of utilizing ﬁlters
is that there is latency for the length of window size w, for 1
w
Pw
j=1 |x(s,j)| = ˆx(s,j), where
ˆx(s,j) ∈ˆXs is our ﬁnal processed signal. However, since the objective of our system is to
control a UI, it requires a rapid response with low latency. Furthermore, this case requires
an additional zero setting, which involves higher computation. The second option is to
differentiate sensor signals in a pairwise manner, which is indicated in Equation (4) where
s , s
′. This new ˆX(s,s′ ) comes effective when minimizing the noises, as sensors are proxi-
mal to each other and we assume that noises triggered by the external factors would affect
5

(a)
(b)
Fig. 3. (a) raw signals with a single hand gesture presented, (b) processed signals covering two hand gestures
(Left to Right).
almost identically among ∀s. We adjusted six combinations since 1 ≤(s,s
′) ≤4, however,
the results are not satisfactory as internal noises are still clearly shown.
ˆX(s,s′ ) =
[
∀j
ˆx(s,s′ ,j) s.t. ˆx(s,s′ ,j) = |x(s,j) −x(s′ ,j)|
(4)
The ﬁnal option we inspect is shown in Equation (5), and our empirical study shows that
this scheme is the most effective one among the three options. Equation (5) differentiates
the sequential values between xj and x(j−1), and having ˆx(s,j) ≈0 when σ2(Sj+p1
j
x(s,j)) is
low, providing automatic zero setting with low computations where p1 ∈N is a constant
that implies a certain period. Therefore, we select Equation (5) as our ﬁnal processing
mechanism, and add sensitivity τs and 1 −τs to each term x(s,j) and x(s,j−1) respectively to
endow the corresponding weights, as well as moving the average to smooth out the values
as shown in Equation (6) where ˘xs indicates the processed signals, and ˘Xs denotes the set
of ∀˘x∃s. Moreover, λs indicates the offset of each ∃s, which is an auxiliary measure to
set µ( ˘x(s,j′ ≤j≤j′ +p1)) ≈0, where λs = 1
p1
Pj
′ +p1
j=j′
˘x(s,j). Fig.3(a) shows the raw signals X∀s
where Fig.3(b) shows the processed signals ˘X∀s.
ˆXs =
[
∀j
ˆx(s,j) s.t. ˆx(s,j) = |x(s,j) −x(s,j−1)|
(5)
˘Xs =
[
∀j
( ˘x(s,j) −λs) s.t. ˘x(s,j) = 1
p1
p1
X
j
(τsx(s,j) + (1 −τs)x(s,j−1))
(6)
2.4
Setting Adaptive Threshold
As EF signals from sensors are highly variable throughout the extraction, setting an optimal thresh-
old that could obtain accurate detection is essential. We suggest an adaptive threshold that changes
dynamically, by periodically recomputing the threshold which can adapt to the inconsistent signal
range and provide credible detection performance. The main purpose of the adaptive threshold is to
detect the signal triggered by a hand gesture and to extract the frame that encompasses the authentic
parts of the gesture. Let δs be a threshold of an individual sensor s and φ be a constant that deter-
mines the amplitude of δs. δs is being updated with period p1 as shown in Equation (7). φ is decided
with empirical observations, where φ directly inﬂuences the detection algorithm, determining the
lower bound of δs, such that infδs ≈φ when base term 1
p1
Pp1
j=1 ˘x(s,j) ≈0. When ( ˘x(s,j) −λs) ≥δs
and ( ˘x(s,j′ >j) −λs) ≤δs where (j + 50) ≥j
′, the system recognizes this as a detection and extracts
˘x(s,j−ps≤j≤j′ +pe) where ps and pe are the constants that indicate period, in order to secure the whole
frame that shifts forward from the start of the detection (i.e., ˘x(s,j) −λs ≥δs) which is at index j, and
6

moves backward from the end of the detection (i.e., ˘x(s,j′ >j) −λs ≤δs), which is at index j
′. The
system consists of two parts: offset initialization (Algorithm 1), and hand gesture detection through
adaptive threshold that returns the frame automatically in real-time (Algorithm 2).
δs = 1
p1
p1
X
j=1
( ˘x(s,j) −λs) + φ
(7)
Algorithm 1 Offset Initialization
Input: Initialize period p0A
Output: Offset λs
for each s do in parallel
Initialize (starts,ends) ←0
Initialize δs ←φ
Initialize empty list ˘Xs,inits
for do j = 1, ..., p0A
˘Xs
L
˘x(s,j)
▷append
λs ←
1
n( ˘Xs) · P
∀j ˘x(s,j)
Return λs,starts,ends,δs,inits
Furthermore, in preparation of the case where sensor values suddenly surge when a dialectic object is
being directly contacted by the sensor (huge amount of charges ﬂow in this case compare with non-
contact methods), additional measure to take precaution needs to be designed. When |j −j
′| > psaf e,
the system perceives this outlier as malfunction and recomputes until ˘Xs is stabilized using offset
λs. The overall steps of detection & frame extraction are shown in Algorithm 2. Before running
Algorithm 2, we compute the initial λs for a certain period p0 where A
L
B indicates the appending
B to A function, and starts and ends denote the starting frame and ending frame respectively.
In Algorithm 2, inits is a supplementary measure to compute λs storing ˘x(s,j) for p1. In order to
determine the ﬁnal frame, let ST ART ,END be a local volatile variable that denotes the temporary
index of the start and end frame using f rames. Then we append array(ST ART ,END) to FRAME,
having FRAME[j][0] = ST ART and FRAME[j][1] = END where j is the current index. We
deﬁne the ﬁnal frame as ψk, and its mathematical expression is shown in Equation (8) where k is an
index of the extracted frame. Note that λs is iteratively being updated.
ψk =
Frame[k][1]
[
j=Frame[k][0]
( ˘x(s,j) −λs)
(8)
Based on the designed algorithms, we automatically detect a hand gesture signal using an adap-
tive threshold and extract the signal frame that covers the authentic section triggered by the hand
movement in real-time. The adaptive threshold and extracted motion frame are shown in Fig.4. The
parameter settings including multiple periods and the algorithm performances are demonstrated in
Section 5.
2.5
System Architecture and Components
The hardware in our system includes three main components: four sensors (copper plates) for col-
lecting EF signals, middleware (Arduino UNO) for aggregating sensor signals which transmits the
signals to local devices through serial communication, and local devices. The sensors are located on
top of the PVC plate which is made of non-conductive materials to preserve sensor signals. Recall
that the input raw sensor signals are processed inside a device based on the methodologies in Section
3. Using the incoming signals, the system detects a motion gesture, extracts its frame, and classiﬁes
the frame implementing the algorithms proposed in Section 4. Finally, the classiﬁcation result is
7

Algorithm 2 Hand Gesture Detection through Adaptive Threshold
Input: input signal ˘x(s,j), offset/threshold update period p1, period that adds forward from the
start ps, period that adds backward from the end pe, auxiliary period psaf e, auxiliary period p0B
Output: FRAME
for each s do in parallel
initialize empty list f rames
ST ART ,END ←0
(λs,starts,ends,δs,inits) ←Offset Initialization
▷Algorithm 1
while ˘x(s,j) , ∅do
▷run until input signal halts
for each s do in parallel
˘Xs
L
( ˘x(s,j) −λs)
if starts = 0 and ends = 0 then
inits
L
˘x(s,j)
▷Compute offset when frame is not set
if ( ˘x(x,j) −λs) > δs and ( ˘x(s,j−1) −λs) < δs then
▷˘x(s,j) passed the δs
starts ←j −ps
▷Shift forward to cover the authentic signal
else if ( ˘x(s,j) −λs) > δs then
▷In the middle of higher than δs
cnt ←cnt + 1
▷Safety measure
else if ( ˘x(s,j) −λs) < δs and ( ˘x(s,j−1) −λs) > δs then
ends ←j + pe
▷Shift backward to cover the authentic signal
cnt ←0
else if starts = 0 and ends = 0 and j%p1 = 0 then
λs ←µ(inits)
δs ←1
p1 · Pj
k=j−p1 ˘x(s,k) + φ
inits ←emptylist
if ˘x(s,j) > δs and cnt > psaf e then
▷safety measure
δs ←1
p1 · Pj
k=j−p1 ˘x(s,k)
▷offset recompute
cnt ←0
if j = ends and j > p0B then
▷Another initial period
f rames
L
array(starts,ends)
(starts,ends) ←0
if p0B < j then
for each s do in parallel
if f rames , ∅then
ST ART ←f rames[n(f rames)][0]
END ←f rames[n(f rames)][1]
if j = END and ST ART , 0 and END , 0 then
FRAME
L
array(ST ART ,END)
for each s do in parallel
f rames ←emptylist
(ST ART ,END) ←0
return FRAME
transmitted through socket communication to a foreground application for UI control, which manip-
ulates the interface with the built-in conditions such as Left to Right is to move to a next page and
Right to Left is to go back to a previous page. The functions are listed in Table 2.
3
Training Classiﬁer and Controlling UI
3.1
Training AI Classiﬁer
As deep learning methods have been shown to have exceptional performance on predicting the input
data into right class labels in a given feature space, we adopt a deep learning classiﬁer model to
train our hand gesture dataset to determine its class label among 10 gesture types. We employ the
8

(a)
(b)
Fig. 4. (a) Adaptive threshold (red horizontal bars) which is periodically updated based on the amplitude of the
input signal. (b) The frame extracted based on Algorithm 2.
pre-trained classiﬁer to conduct the classiﬁcation of the extracted frames in real-time in order to
utilize the prediction result as a conditional input signal to control UI. Our objective function in
deep learning is shown in Equation (9) where L is a categorical cross entropy loss function with
inputs of true label yk, predicted label g(ψ,M), and M(s,k) ∋{weight(s,k),bias(s,k)} on frame index
k. We update M through gradient descent: M(t+1)
(s,k) = M(t)
(s,k) −η ·
∂
∂M(t)
(s,k)
· L (M(t)
(s,k)) where η denotes
the learning rate.
min
Mk∈Rd
1
n(ψ(s,k))
X
∀k
L (y(s,k),g(ψ(s,k),M(s,k))
(9)
Since our dataset is in a time-series format, we implement two deep learning models which are
proper for handling time-series data: Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) and Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM). By training the neural networks, it returns a predicted label. The overall training perfor-
mance is presented in Section 5-2.
3.2
UI Control and Optimal System Structure
The application UI is being directly controlled by a human in a foreground process, therefore
the overall process including signal processing, thresholding, frame extraction, and classiﬁcation
should operate on the background process. The daemon process transmits the classiﬁcation result
to the foreground application through socket communication inside the single local device (Intel i7-
1165G7, 2.8GHz, 16GB RAM). Depending on the gesture types, each has its certain function that
controls a given UI. For example, when the classiﬁer recognizes the hand gesture signal as ‘Left to
Right’, then it commands to move to the next page. The other functions of motion class labels are
shown in Table 2. We show a simple UI that visually shows through the window which contains
the small GUI elements. Through importing the python GUI library Tkinter, we construct a window
containing strings that signify the current hand motion gesture, for example, showing up “Left to
Right” sending the input to the UI process. Again, this is to show the possibility of further im-
plementation of diverse hand motion gesture class label inputs, which can be utilized to effectively
control the target device.
4
Experimental Evaluation
4.1
Experimental Setup
The framework’s environmental setup consists of two main entities: four copper sensor plates for
collecting EF signals, and middleware (Arduino UNO) for aggregating the raw sensor signal data
which transmits the data to the local device through serial communication. Once the data have
9

TABLE. 2. Types of hand motion gestures
Left to Right
Right to Left
UP
DOWN
Down to Left
Class 1
Class 2
Class 3
Class 4
Class 5
Next page
Previous page
Scroll up
Scroll down
Previous 2 pages
Down to Right
Left to Down
Right to Down
Up to Left
Up to Right
Class 6
Class 7
Class 8
Class 9
Class 10
Next 2 pages
Off
On
Volume down
Volume up
been collected, they will be passed through our pipeline as shown in Fig.1 in which different pre-
processing steps happen in a sequence. Once the data processing pipeline ﬁnishes, the processed
signal is fed to the pre-trained neural network model for gesture classiﬁcation. Finally, the clas-
siﬁcation result is transmitted through socket communication to another python GUI application
process and the results of the gesture motions are shown on the interface for any activity that takes
place near the sensors.
We conducted 10 different hand motion gestures which are listed in Table 2, and extracted the
optimal signal frame. The following parameters are the designated parameters: ps = 70, pe = 70,
φ = 20, p0A = 10 seconds, p0B = 8 seconds, psaf e = 3 seconds, and p1 = Sampling rate ·
Initialization time where Sampling rate = 53 and Initialization time = 6 seconds. Based
on the preset hyper-parameters, we operate our system and wave hand gesture motions near the
sensor plates, measuring the classiﬁcation accuracy of 10 gesture types and observing the accurate
controllability of UI. Furthermore, we compare the accuracy and loss of two high-performance deep
learning models: LSTM and GRU. For the layer structure of LSTM and GRU: LSTM (20) / GRU
(20) – Dense (32) – Dense (64) – Dense (32) – Dense (10) with 60 epochs, batch size of 10, η
= 0.005, and relu activation function for the dense layers except for the ﬁnal layer which uses the
softmax.
4.2
Experiment results
In order to evaluate our proposed framework, we use three evaluation metrics to assess our adaptive
threshold, optimal period of the extracted frame, and train the ability of a deep learning classiﬁer.
The ﬁrst metric is to quantitatively estimate the performance of the adaptive threshold in each sensor,
which is solely for detecting the occurrence of hand gestures near the sensor plates and we deﬁne this
as Detection rate. The second metric is to assess the coverage area of the extracted frame signal after
detection, as the withdrawn frame is the key source for recognizing authentic hand motion types,
and we denote this as Frame Extraction rate. Finally, in order to conduct accurate classiﬁcation
by calling the real-time hand gesture frames, a well-trained AI model is required, and the ﬁnal
metric is to evaluate the performance of the trainability of the classiﬁer. Our overall evaluation
shows 98.8% Detection rate, 98.4% Frame Extraction rate, and accuracy of 98.79 (±0.72)% in
GRU, 98.05 %(±0.68) in LSTM. Fig.5 shows the average value of the validation dataset’s accuracy
and loss of pre-trained classiﬁers after 30 independent training trials, with standard deviation shown
in each epoch step. The macro-average of precision, recall, and f1 score for all labels approximate
to 1.0. In Fig.5, it shows GRU has more stable convergence with slightly higher accuracy at the
end. Therefore, we applied a pre-trained GRU classiﬁer into the ﬁnal background process and based
on the classiﬁcation result, it dynamically controls the foreground application process UI with 10
options. To quantitatively evaluate the overall performance of the suggested system, it operates with
an average of 98.67 (±2.005) % accuracy.
5
Conclusion and Future Work
This paper proposes a real-time user interface control system based on hand motion gesture recog-
nition through non-contact capacitive sensing. Our designed framework processes raw capacitance
signal data from sensors with sequential differentiation, which are selected as an optimum option
among ﬁltering schemes with spectrum analysis, and two differentiation computations are performed
after observing each result. By dynamically computing the adaptive threshold, the system detects a
movement near sensors and automatically extracts the motion gesture frame that covers the authentic
10

(a)
(b)
Fig. 5. Performance of GRU and LSTM: (a) Average of GRU test accuracy and Loss with standard deviation
after 30 training trials. (b) Average of LSTM test accuracy and Loss with standard deviation after 30 training
trials.
EF disturbance signal triggered by hand. This frame is sent to a pre-trained GRU classiﬁer, which
categorizes the input frame among 10 predeﬁned hand motion gesture types. Furthermore, the clas-
siﬁcation result is transmitted to another application process that maneuvers the UI and controls the
interface with built-in commands. This proposed work provides the feasibility of adopting a capac-
itive sensing system, which shows the possibility of commercializing intensive application products
through capacitive proximity sensing as capacitive proximity sensing is emerging as a promising
sensing technology that enables the implementation of new applications in the domains of IoT, VR,
AR, touchless interface, HMI, robotics, HCI, and NUI, with cost-efﬁciency. The dataset used to
support the study is uploaded in GitHub [3] and can be accessed by the public.
The limitations of our proposed system include limited distance between a sensor and a dialectic
object, and unstable signal trend affected by the surrounding.
Limited distance is an intrinsic
drawback of a capacitive sensor as it is non-contact proximity sensing. The range of height for our
system in order to detect a hand motion is approximately under 15cm. This distance may not be
sufﬁcient enough to be commercialized in products, therefore, more accurate and sensitive sensing
is required. The overall trend of capacitive sensor signal differs when surrounding changes, and as
we cannot predict the heterogeneous circumstances, this diversity is inevitable. This problem can
partially gain a solution through two basic approaches, collecting diverse datasets and computing
the physical model of the given environment in order to gain possible cases of how the signal pattern
would occur. Our future work lies on the design of approaches to resolve the above mentioned
limitations: analyzing the EF disturbance pattern when dialectic objects are near, and collecting
more data.
Moreover, we will focus on increasing the utility of the proposed system, adding
further hand gesture motion data with an increasing number of hand gesture types (at least 100
gestures). After successfully classifying the labels and connecting more sensors to construct a more
comprehensive system, these steps will contribute to constructing an intensive system with higher
multiplicity that utilizes capacitive sensing.
