Learning Style-Aware Symbolic Music Representations
by Adversarial Autoencoders
AndreaValenti12 and Antonio Carta2 and Davide Bacciu2
Abstract.
We address the challenging open problem of learning
an effective latent space for symbolic music data in generative mu-
sic modeling. We focus on leveraging adversarial regularization as
a ﬂexible and natural mean to imbue variational autoencoders with
context information concerning music genre and style. Through the
paper, we show how Gaussian mixtures taking into account music
metadata information can be used as an effective prior for the au-
toencoder latent space, introducing the ﬁrst Music Adversarial Au-
toencoder (MusAE). The empirical analysis on a large scale bench-
mark shows that our model has a higher reconstruction accuracy than
state-of-the-art models based on standard variational autoencoders.
It is also able to create realistic interpolations between two musical
sequences, smoothly changing the dynamics of the different tracks.
Experiments show that the model can organise its latent space ac-
cordingly to low-level properties of the musical pieces, as well as to
embed into the latent variables the high-level genre information in-
jected from the prior distribution to increase its overall performance.
This allows us to perform changes to the generated pieces in a prin-
cipled way.
1
Introduction
In recent years, we have been witnessing an increasing attention
on creative aspects of artiﬁcial intelligence, in particular when
linked to the generation of art, such as in painting[21, 18, 11],
literature[16, 28] and music composition[26, 14]. Much of this inter-
est has been enabled by the availability of generative deep learning
models apt to model distributions or sampling processes over such
intricate and multifaceted pieces of information (begging pardon for
the simpliﬁcation of such a high act of human creativity which is
art). While these models appear sufﬁciently mature to tackle the gen-
eration of plausible artiﬁcial works in some artistic ﬁelds, such as
in visual arts, there are other arts in which we are still struggling to
capture the essence and variability of the underlying stylistic aspects.
Music is one of such arts, characterized by still inextricable entangle-
ments between different stylistic dimensions.
In this paper, we propose a model whose long-term ambition can
be that to assist a composer during the writing process of a novel
score. The model is composed of two parts: an encoder and a decoder.
The encoder takes as input a score, represented as several tracks for
each instrument, and computes a latent vector. Ideally, the latent vec-
tor should encode the entire score into musically meaningful fea-
tures, easy to understand from a musician’s perspective and disentan-

2 Dipartimento di Informatica, Universit`a di Pisa, Italy.

gled such that each property of the original score can be customized
separately with a simple modiﬁcation to the vector. A composer can
modify the vector to change low-level properties of the score, such
as the note’s density or average length, or it can modify high-level
features like the genre, for example, to create a more rock or jazzy
tune. The modiﬁed vector can be fed as input to the decoder, which
generates a novel score with the desired features. This approach re-
quires to solve a fundamental question: How can we learn a good
representation for a music score?
In this paper, we present a novel architecture for music model-
ing and generation. Its name is MusAE (the name is a reference to
the Muses of ancient Greek mythology, the inspirational goddesses,
of Literature, Science and Art) and its architecture is based on the
adversarial autoencoder (AAE) [22]. AAEs give us several advan-
tages over standard variational autoencoders (VAEs): using adver-
sarial regularization in place of the KL divergence allows for more
ﬂexibility over the choice of prior distribution of the latent variables,
which can, in principle, be forced to follow any probability distri-
bution, even ones with unknown functional form (for example, in
one of their experiments Makhzani et al. trained an AAE whose la-
tent factors are forced to follow a swiss roll distribution [22]). This
constitutes an important advantage for AAEs over VAEs, where the
imposed prior distribution must necessarily be chosen to make the
KL divergence term computable. MusAE is capable of reconstruct-
ing musical phrases with high accuracy and to interpolate between
latent representations in a sound pleasing way. The model can also
change speciﬁc properties of the songs by modifying their respective
latent factors. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time an
AAE has been applied with success to automatic music generation.
2
Background
2.1
Related Work
As surveyed in [5], recent years have seen an increasingly successful
application of generative models such as the VAE by [20] and gen-
erative adversarial networks (GAN) by [12]. The MIDI-VAE model
by [6] is based on VAEs and it considers both pitches, velocities and
instruments to perform style transfer between two genres. In [26], it
is introduced Music VAE, a hierarchical sequence-to-sequence VAE
model. The hierarchy is expressed by a two-level decoder: in the ﬁrst
level the so-called “conductor” decoder takes the latent factors gen-
erated by the encoder as input, and in turn generates some intermedi-
ates codes, which are then used by the low-level decoder to generate
the actual piano roll. The hierarchical structure of Music VAE makes
it able to capture long-term structure in polyphonic music, which is
generally considered to be a difﬁcult problem, due to the complexity
of the data distribution.
arXiv:2001.05494v2  [cs.SD]  20 Feb 2020

GAN, albeit powerful in principle, are very difﬁcult to train ef-
fectively [2], especially when applied to sequential data. However,
this has not discouraged scientists, and many recent works success-
fully apply GAN to music generation. Works by [23], [29] and [9]
have shown that different types of GAN can be effectively applied
to music composition. Finally, the SeqGAN model [30], applies an
RNN-based GAN to music by incorporating reinforcement learning
techniques.
2.2
Adversarial Autoencoder
First introduced by [22], the AAE model can be viewed as the com-
bination of VAE and GAN. Formally, let x be the data sample and
z be the corresponding latent variables of the AAE. Let p(z) be the
prior imposed on the latent variables, let qλ(z|x) be the encoder con-
ditional distribution and let pθ(x|z) be the decoder conditional distri-
bution. Let pd(x) the actual data distribution and pg(x) be the model
distribution (i.e. the distribution of data generated by the model).
Then, the encoder deﬁnes an aggregated posterior distribution qλ(z)
on the latent variables z as follows
qλ(z) =
Z
qλ(z|x)pd(x)
(1)
In AAEs the aggregate posterior qλ(z) is made to match the arbi-
trary prior p(z) by attaching an adversarial network (the discrimina-
tor) at the top of the latent variables z. The loss function of AAE thus
becomes
LAAE = Ez∼qλ(z|x)[logpθ(x|z)] + βLGAN
(2)
where β regulates the amount of desired adversarial regularisation.
LGAN is the adversarial GAN loss as deﬁned in [12].
During training, the autoencoder learns to minimise the recon-
struction error, while the adversarial network guides the encoder to
match the imposed prior. Thus, the encoder plays the role of the gen-
erator of the adversarial part, while the adversarial network is equiv-
alent to the GAN’s discriminator. At the end of the training, the de-
coder can be used as a generative model that maps the imposed prior
p(z) to the data distribution.
The training procedure of an AAE consists of two phases: the re-
construction phase and the regularization phase, corresponding to a
loss Ltotal comprising two terms
Ltotal = H(pd, pg) + βLW GAN−GP ,
(3)
where H(pd, pg) denotes the cross entropy between the original data
samples and their reconstructions, and acts as autoencoder loss dur-
ing the reconstruction phase. The second term is the Wasserstein
GAN with Gradient Penalty (WGAN-GP) loss, [13] that is
LW GAN−GP = Ex∼pr[dφ(x)]
(4)
−Ez∼pz[dφ(gθ(z))]
(5)
+ λEˆx∼pˆx[(∥∇ˆxdφ(ˆx)∥2 −1)2]
(6)
where ˆx is computed by ˆx = αgθ(z) + (1 −α)x and α is sampled
uniformly between 0 and 1. This term is responsible for the adver-
sarial regularization imposed on the latent variables z. Each phase is
trained with gradient descent end-to-end.
3
Music Adversarial Autoencoder (MusAE)
MusAE is based on an AAE architecture, exploiting the adversarial
regularization to allow richer representations of the latent space in-
stead of constraining it to a simple Gaussian. This section describes
the model architecture and the input representation.
3.1
Data Representation
The model is designed to work with multitrack MIDI songs. During
the preprocessing stage, the raw MIDI format is transformed into a
multitrack piano roll representation. Each song becomes a sequence,
sampled at regular intervals, where each timestep contains the infor-
mation to play each track. We use a resolution of 4 timesteps per
quarter note, for a total of 16 timesteps per bar. For a given track,
each timestep reports a categorical variable, taking one of the 130
binary discrete states:
• 128 states representing the possible values for MIDI pitches[17].
• One “hold note” state, which indicates to keep playing the note
which was played at the previous timestep.
• One “silent note” state, which indicates a timestep when no notes
are playing.
In the following experiments, we consider four-track songs as this
is the information available in the Lakh Dataset used in the exper-
imental analysis (see Section 4.1). Each sample is thus represented
by a ntimesteps × nnotes × ntracks matrix. Each song in the dataset
has metadata information associated with it, such as title, author, and
so on. In particular, we consider the genre tags of songs. These tags
will be useful for “inspiring” the choice of a prior distribution of the
latent variables (for more information see Sect. 4.1)
3.2
Architecture
Figure 1: MusAE’s architecture. Dashed lines denote stochastic oper-
ations, full lines denotes deterministic operations.
MusAE is based on an AAE architecture, comprising an autoen-
coding part responsible for song reconstruction and an adversarial
part injecting a regularization penalty [22]. In this section, we de-
scribe the main components of the architecture (depicted in Figure
1): the encoder, the decoder and the discriminator. In general, the ar-
chitecture and hyperparameters have been chosen to be as close as
possible to [26], in order to perform a direct comparison of the em-
pirical results.
3.2.1
Encoder
The encoder takes the multitrack piano roll representation and com-
putes the latent factors z ∈RNz that encode the entire sequence.
Nz = 512 is the size of the latent space. The architecture, shown
in Figure 1, is composed of 3 layers of bidirectional LSTMs (biL-
STM [27]) with Nh = 1024 hidden units. The bidirectionality of
the model enables the encoder to produce more informative latent

variables by using context information about future timesteps: this
is a desirable property in the case of music data since the meaning
of a note usually depends on the whole phrase and it is not only re-
stricted to the preceding notes. Let x be a training sample. Then, the
encoder’s behaviour can be described by
h =biLSTM(x)
(7)
µ =Wµh
(8)
σpre =Wσh
(9)
σ =exp(2σpre),
(10)
where Wµ ∈RNh×Nz and Wσ ∈RNh×Nz are the weight matrices
of the linear layers used to compute, respectively, µ and σpre.
3.2.2
Decoder
The decoder performs the inverse operation of the encoder: given
the latent factors z, it produces the piano roll corresponding to that
particular combination of latent variables (see Figure 1). We use a
separate decoder for each track, allowing each module to specialize
in the different dynamics of the tracks. Let z be a latent code, the
decoder operates as follows:
htrack
0
= Wtrackz
(11)
˜xtrack = Softmax(LSTMtrack(z, htrack
0
))
(12)
˜x = [˜xdrums|˜xbass|˜xguitar|˜xstrings],
(13)
where track
∈
{drums, bass, guitar, strings}, Wtrack
∈
RNz×Nh denotes the weight parameters of the linear layers used to
compute the initial hidden state htrack
0
∈RNh for their respective
LSTMs, ˜x is the track generated from the decoder, and the symbol |
denotes the concatenation operator. Each decoder comprises 3-layers
of LSTMs with Nh hidden units. The latent vector z is fed as a con-
stant input to the LSTMs at each timestep.
In contrast with other related models ([26] [6]), our decoder is not
autoregressive, meaning that the only information available during
the song generation is the latent code z. This limitation constrains
the decoder to exploit the latent code to generate the sequence and
eliminates the tendency of ignoring the latent code [26] that is typical
of powerful autoregressive models.
3.2.3
Discriminator
The discriminator is a multilayer perceptron with 2 hidden layers
of Nh hidden units each followed by a tanh activation. Its task is
to distinguish between “real” latent variables, sampled from prior
latent distributions, and “artiﬁcial” ones, generated by the encoder to
perform the variational approximation of the ELBO in an adversarial
way. Following the literature for the Wasserstein GAN [3], the last
layer of the discriminator is a linear layer which outputs the ﬁnal
score, that is, a scalar measure of how well a latent variable resembles
the imposed prior distribution.
3.3
Choice of Prior Distributions
Using an adversarial discriminator network in place of the KL diver-
gence to perform latent space regularisation allows us more ﬂexibil-
ity in the choice of the prior distribution of the latent factors z. While,
for standard VAE, we are required to use a distribution for which a
closed-form of the KL divergence is known and tractable (typically,
in practice, this limits the choice to gaussian distributions), by using
an AAE the only requirement we have is to be able to sample from
the chosen distribution. This allows us to choose non-standard dis-
tributions that may, for example, leverage any prior knowledge that
is speciﬁc from the particular domain of application. In particular,
for the experiments described in the next sections, we decided to im-
pose two different prior distribution. First, as a baseline, we used a
standard isotropic gaussian with mean 0 and variance I, much like
VAEs. This allowed us to perform a direct comparison of our results
with other VAE models found in the literature. The second distri-
bution is obtained from a mixture of 32 gaussians, displaced in a
“ﬂower-like” shape (it can be thought as a Nz-dimensional general-
ization of the distribution depicted in Figure 4a of [22]). This “ﬂower
distribution” allows us to put similar genres, which are going to have
similar metrics (see Fig. 3), closer in the latent space. This is a ben-
eﬁcial constraint that is not easy to enforce by using only a single
gaussian. Furthermore, it allows to model “cross-genres” songs by
pushing their latent codes to the center of the “ﬂower”. Formally,
the means of such gaussians are displaced on a 2-dimensional circle,
according to the formula
µi = [cos(2πi
n ), sin(2πi
n ), 0, ..., 0]
(14)
where n = 32 in our case. The µi have a total of Nz dimensions.
The covariance matrix Σi is obtained in the following way:
vi =
 cos( 2πi
n )
sin( 2πi
n )
−sin( 2πi
n )
cos( 2πi
n )

(15)
Mi =

vT
i
0
0
I

(16)
S =
a1
0
0
diag(a2)

(17)
Σi = MiSM −1
i
(18)
where, as before, n = 32 and Mi and S are Nz × Nz matrices. In
practice, we set variance a1 = 0.1 for the radial (i.e. center-to-outer)
dimension, and variance a2 = 0.001 for the remaining dimensions.
We then use the matrix Mi to rotate S accordingly to the position of
the speciﬁc gaussian. We chose to keep just the 32 most-occurring
genre tags to avoid the noisier ones. Each genre tag is associated
with a different gaussian in the latent space, based on the metadata
information that comes with each song (see Sect. 3.1). The gaussian
for each genre was chosen in order to put related genres closer in the
latent space, by assigning them to gaussians that are closer to each
other. By injecting genre information we are thus able to encourage a
meaningful organisation of the latent space. If a song had more than
one tag associated with it, we randomly selected a single tag using
uniform probability (this selection happens at training time, so the
training process can select another available tag for that song in a
subsequent epoch).
4
Experimental Analysis
In this section, we empirically assess the ability of MusAE to prop-
erly encode musical sequences and to learn a structured and inter-
pretable organization of the latent space.
A useful music editor must have several desirable properties.
First, it should be able to represent different input songs with high
accuracy. This is especially important for music, where even little
variations can signiﬁcantly alter the structure and the ﬁnal appeal of

Table 1: Reconstruction accuracy of MusAE on the Lakh MIDI dataset, compared to the Music VAE model[26]. Higher is better.
MusAE (gaussian)
MusAE (gaussian mixture)
Music VAE (ﬂat)
Music VAE (hierarchical)
2 bar drums
0.999
–
0.917
–
2-bar melody
0.991
–
0.951
–
16-bar drums
0.773
0.911
0.641
0.895
16-bar bass
0.763
0.880
0.651
0.782
16-bar guitar/piano
0.710
0.797
0.660
0.760
16-bar strings
0.802
0.825
–
–
16-bar average (dbgs)
0.762
0.853
–
–
16-bar average (dbg)
0.749
0.863
0.651
0.812
a song. Speciﬁcally for our model, we must test the ability of the
learned latent space to be expressive enough to capture every subtle
nuance of the input data.
Then, the model should be able to capture several properties of
music. Ideally, the model should separate the content from the style,
and allow the user to easily modify each property of the ﬁnal song.
Therefore, the learned latent space of the model should be able to ef-
fectively capture the important factors of variation of the data space.
Given two different songs mapped into the latent space, the model
must allow to easily sample new points from the latent space (e.g.
with linear interpolation) and get corresponding points in the data
space that still sound realistic, and whose musical properties vary
smoothly. Indeed, identifying the meaningful axis of variation in the
latent space is the ﬁrst step for being able to modify a song in a prin-
cipled and controllable way.
For reproducibility, and to facilitate future research in the ﬁeld, we
make the code publicly available on Github 3. It is also possible to lis-
ten to some of the ﬁnal generated samples in the additional material
4.
4.1
Dataset and Experimental Setup
We use the same preprocessing procedure of [26] to perform a direct
performance comparison of the reconstruction error with their ap-
proach. The dataset used for the experiments is composed of MIDI
songs taken from the “LMD matched” version of the Lakh MIDI
dataset [24], a collection of more than 40.000 song of various gen-
res, transcribed in MIDI format. Each song has a series of metadata
associated to it. In our experiments we kept metadata regarding mu-
sic genres, for an initial total of 1179 different possible genre tags.
We then selected the 32 most occurring tags, which accounted alone
for more than 35% of the total genre tags. We use these metadata
information to condition the prior distribution of the model’s latent
space, as described in Sect. 3.3. From this dataset, we retained only
songs satisfying the following properties:
• Songs having only one time signature change event (i.e. songs that
did not change their time signature during the execution).
• Songs having a time signature of 4
4.
• Songs containing at least one non-empty drums track (MIDI chan-
nel 10).
• Songs containing at least one non-empty bass track (MIDI pro-
gram number in the range [32, 39]).
• Songs containing at least one non-empty guitar/piano track (MIDI
program number in the range [0, 31]).
3 https://github.com/Andrea-V/MusAE
4 http://bit.ly/MusAE-ADD
A sliding window of size of 2 bars and a stride of 1 bar is used to
extract all unique 2-bar (32 timesteps) musical sequences from the
remaining songs. If a track has more than one note playing at the
same time, we consider only the note with the lowest pitch. This was
done for two reasons: ﬁrst, it let us directly compare quantitative
results with similar models found in the literature. Second, ﬁnding
an effective way to generate completely polyphonic pianorolls is
an interesting open problem that deserves a discussion on its own,
designing solutions to this is, therefore, of out of the scope of this
paper (we refer the interested readers to the hybrid RNN-RBM
model of [4]). We perform data augmentation on the extracted
sequences by randomly transposing every pitch of the sequence to
any of the 12 possible tonal keys of the octave, uniformly sampling
the amount of transposition semitones from the interval [-5, 6]. If a
song contains more than one drums, bass, or guitar/piano tracks, we
consider the cross product of all possible combinations. Other tracks
that cannot be categorized as either drums, bass or guitar tracks are
then merged in an additional “strings” track. Among the extracted
sequences, we only add to the ﬁnal dataset those containing at
most 1 bar of consecutive silence in every track. This preprocessing
procedure resulted in about 300,000 data samples. To test the
model’s reconstruction ability with very long musical sequences we
evaluate on an additional dataset with samples of length 16 bars,
corresponding to 256 timesteps. The preprocessing procedure for
this dataset is almost identical to the one described above for 2-bar
sequences, except for the fact that it uses a 16-bar sliding window
with a stride of 1-bar to extract the unique musical sequences from
the songs. All other steps are unchanged. This dataset resulted in
about 100,000 data samples. During training, 20% of samples are
retained from their respective datasets as a separate validation set.
All preprocessing is made with the help of pypianoroll [10] and
pretty midi [25] libraries for Python.
The experiments use the Adam optimizer [19] with a learning rate
of 10−4 and an exponential decay rate of 10−4, applied after each
gradient update. The batch size is 256. The adversarial regulariza-
tion weight β is annealed from 0 to 1 during training with ﬁxed in-
creases of 0.1, scheduled every 10,000 gradient updates. The model
processes the song in chunks of either 2 or 16 bars (depending on
the speciﬁc dataset) and each bar is represented by a sequence of
16 timesteps, sampled at regular intervals. During model selection,
we found out that the training procedure is very stable and mostly
insensitive to the initial random seed or the speciﬁc hyperparameter
values. The only parameter that required a slightly more careful tun-
ing was the learning rate. In general, we chose the hyperparameter
values that resulted in a good convergence speed without adding too
much complexity to the training procedure.
We trained one model on the 2-bar dataset, forcing a gaussian prior

Drums
Bass
Guitar
= 0
= 0.25
= 0.5
= 0.75
= 1
Strings
Figure 2: Example of interpolation between two different songs. We notice that the generated pianorolls are gradually changing in a plausible
way.
on the latent space. For the 16-bar dataset, we trained two differ-
ent models. The ﬁrst one uses a single gaussian prior distribution,
whereas the second one uses the mixture of 32 gaussians conditioned
on the genres tag information, described in section 3.3. The experi-
ments have been implemented in Python 3.6, using the Keras library
(with TensorFlow backend) [8][1].
4.2
Input Reconstruction
To test the reconstruction abilities of MusAE, a test sample x is ﬁrst
fed as input to the encoder, producing the corresponding latent code
z, which is then used by the decoder to generate the reconstructed
sample ˜x. The generated data sample is then compared to the orig-
inal one. Ideally, if the training was successful, x and ˜x should be
indistinguishable from each other.
The ﬁnal reconstruction accuracy mainly depends on two hyper-
parameters: the value of the β coefﬁcient for the WGAN-GP loss
and the number of latent factors. Having high values of β (β >> 1)
will cause the model to deviate very little from the imposed prior,
using as few latent dimensions as possible and only if it signiﬁcantly
improves reconstruction accuracy. On the other hand, a small β al-
lows the model to focus more on reconstruction, at the expense of the
entanglement of the latent space [15][7]. Similarly, using few latent
variables z will force the model to be computationally efﬁcient and
to encode in the latent space only the most relevant variation of the
data, allowing for better control of generated songs at the expense of
the reconstruction accuracy.
Table 1 reports the reconstruction accuracy of the MusAE models
over the Lakh MIDI dataset compared to the Music VAE models by
[26]. The gaussian version of MusAE consistently outperforms the
similar, ﬂat version of Music VAE, both on the 2-bar and the 16-bar
dataset, showing that the AAE framework is a competitive approach
for dealing with symbolic music data. On the other hand, to com-
pete with the more complex architecture of hierarchical Music VAE,
a more expressive prior distribution is needed. Indeed, the Gaussian
mixture version of MusAE reaches a better reconstruction accuracy
than the Music VAE. Note that the MusAE models under considera-
tion only differ for the choice of the imposed prior distribution. Thus,
this improvement of performances comes at no additional computa-
tional cost (except for the increased cost of sampling from a more
complicated distribution, which most of the time is negligible). This
is another advantage of MusAE over similar models such as Music
VAE, where the increased performance is often obtained through a
more complex architecture, which necessarily entails a more com-
plex and lengthier training phase.
4.3
Latent Space Interpolation
Latent space interpolations allow mixing two different pianorolls. A
successful mix performs a gradual change from the initial pianoroll
to the ﬁnal one. Interpolations are constructed by encoding two se-
lected data samples x1 and x2, thus producing the corresponding fac-
tors z1 and z2 in the latent space. The intermediate latent codes are
produced using a linear interpolation between the two original latent
factors
ˆz = αz1 + (1 −α)z2
(19)
where α is made to vary in the interval [0, 1]. The interpolated la-
tent codes ˆz are fed to the decoder, which generates the mixed pi-
ano rolls. Figure 4 shows the normalized hamming distances of the
MusAE models between the resulting interpolated pianoroll and the
initial pianoroll (i.e. x1) for various values of α. We also computed,
as a baseline, an interpolation in the data space, where we treated the
pianorolls as matrices of Bernoulli random variables with parameter
α. The interpolated pianoroll is then obtained by sampling the ran-
dom variables. The hamming losses between the interpolated and the
ﬁnal pianoroll x2 behave in a specular manner, so they are not shown.
Figure 4 shows that the hamming distances increase monotonically
for all models. This is a sign that the changes in the interpolated pi-
anorolls are smooth, and gradually go from x1 to x2. In this case,
the best-performing model is the 2bar version with Gaussian prior.
The hamming loss of the latent space interpolations closely follows
the one of data interpolations, although the former shows a slightly
sharper change from the initial and the ﬁnal piece with respect to the
latter. This is aligned with the perception of humans, which usually
favour interpolations that combine the two pieces more interestingly
than by simply taking an average. The 16bar models have lower re-
construction accuracy than the 2bar model, so they tend to start with
a higher hamming distance of the interpolation for α = 0. Still, the
Gaussian mixture prior seems to be beneﬁcial for the interpolation,
conﬁrming the results obtained in Section 4.2 when comparing re-
construction errors. In general, interpolations are smooth and sound
quite convincing to the ear 5. The interpolated bars are musically
meaningful and contain references to both musical pieces. For exam-
ple, if the starting bar contains few long notes and low pitches, and
the ending bar contains many short high-pitched notes, during the
5 http://bit.ly/MusAE_interpolations

Figure 3: Relative differences of low-level metrics of each gaussian in
the gaussian mixture prior distribution, computed with respect to their
means.
Figure 4: Hamming losses of interpolations with respect to x1. The in-
terpolating parameter α is gradually increased from 0 to 1 over time.
The result refer to the mean of 256 interpolations.
interpolation the notes pitch and frequency will gradually increase,
while the duration of the notes will gradually decrease. This is a sign
that the model successfully learned to map the high-dimensional real
manifold into a lower-dimensional, simpler one, where the data sam-
ples are evenly distributed in the latent space. An example of inter-
polation is shown in Figure 2, which clearly shows a gradual change
for increasing values of α.
4.4
Latent Space Analysis
In this experiment, we analyse the behaviour of the latent space when
a non-trivial prior distribution is imposed, such as the gaussian mix-
ture distribution previously described in Section 3.3. First, we inspect
the model’s ability of organising its latent space accordingly to low-
level characteristics of the pianorolls. Then, we want to see whether
it is capable of relating such low-level characteristics to high-level
musical concepts, such as genres.
4.4.1
Low-level Metrics
We sampled 256 latent vectors from each of the 32 Gaussians that
compose the prior distribution. We then decoded the latent vectors
and computed a set of metrics over the obtained pianorolls.
These metrics are intended to capture various interesting low-level
musical properties, such as the number of notes, average note length,
average step between two consecutive pitches, and so on. The com-
plete list of the metrics and their descriptions is reported in the ad-
ditional material6. For each metric, we then performed two types of
aggregation:
• Global average: we computed the mean value of the metric over
all the pianorolls.
• Local averages: we computed the mean value of the metric, con-
sidering only the pianoroll sampled from a single gaussian. This
resulted in 32 mean values, one for each gaussian of the prior dis-
tribution.
Finally, we computed the relative changes of the local averages with
respect to the global average.
The ﬁnal results are shown in Figure 3. The horizontal axis indi-
cates the gaussian of origin of the pianorolls from which the metrics
have been computed, while the vertical axis indicates the speciﬁc
metric. Thus, moving along the horizontal axis of the ﬁgure effec-
tively corresponds to moving from a gaussian to the adjacent ones
in the latent space (notice that, since in the actual latent space the
single gaussian are displaced on a circle, the horizontal axis wraps-
up to itself, so that the last gaussian in the ﬁgure is adjacent to the
ﬁrst one). The ﬁgure clearly shows a gradual variation of the metrics
when moving between adjacent gaussians. This is a further sign that
the model successfully learned to organise its latent space in a tidy
way: the richer prior distribution allows the model to capture the most
peculiar low-level characteristics of each genre and to “assign” them
to the corresponding gaussian. Moreover, this genre-induced organ-
isation of the latent space seems indeed to respect the smoothness
property, which, as stated above, is an essential property for being
able to support principled and intuitive editing of musical material.
4.4.2
High-level Genre Information
Finally, we want to investigate to what extent the genre informa-
tion, which was injected in an implicit way during the training phase,
helped the model to incorporate high-level information about musi-
cal style within the latent representations. For each pair of genres, we
randomly selected 256 pianorolls from the training set, 128 of which
belonging to the ﬁrst genre and the other 128 belonging to the second
genre. Since each song may belong to multiple genres, we decided
to select only the pianorolls that are tagged with only one of the two
genres considered but not the other. For example, when comparing
the “pop” and “rock” genre pair, we required the “rock” pianorolls to
not have the “pop” tag associated with them as well, and vice versa.
The selected pianorolls are encoded with the model and projected
using the PCA decomposition of the resulting latent codes. The PCA
decomposition performs a linear projection along the directions of

10
5
0
5
10
15
PC 0
10
5
0
5
10
15
PC 1
tag = rock / pop
10
5
0
5
10
15
PC 0
tag = rock / punk
genre
other
rock
Figure 5: PCA embeddings of pairwise genres.
maximum variance of the latent space of the two genres. Ideally, two
different genres should be linearly separable in these reduced space.
In this respect, a linear separation would allow the model to perform
style transfer more easily. However, most of the musical genres do
not have a clear separation, therefore we expect some overlapping
between similar genres or between genres that have a very broad deﬁ-
nition. Figure 5 shows the ﬁrst two principal components of two such
genre pairs, chosen as examples. The complete plots (and additional
plots, obtained using the t-SNE algorithm) are available among the
additional material6. We denoted the latent codes belonging to the
ﬁrst genre with blue dots, and the ones belonging to the second genre
with orange crosses. In general, the results match our intuitive un-
derstanding of the relations between the genres. For example, the
“rock vs. pop” plot shows a mixed situation, whereas the “rock vs.
punk” plot presents a clearer separation between the two kinds of pi-
anorolls. This reﬂects the fact that “rock” and “pop” are very broad
deﬁnitions, which encompasses many musical sub-genres that can
be, in practice, quite different from one another. Hence, the dividing
line between the two genres is blurry. On the other hand, punk songs
tend to present more homogeneous stylistic characteristics, and this
results in a clearly distinct “punk” area inside the “rock” latent codes.
This alignment between latent space projections and human intuition
is a hint that the latent space successfully embedded (at least to a cer-
tain extent) information about high-level musical style. The fact that
even linear techniques such as PCA are already sufﬁcient to visually
separate the different genres conﬁrms that, and the global nature of
PCA assure us that the separation is real, and not an artifact of the
chosen projection method (as it could have happened with t-SNE).r
5
Discussion and Concluding Remarks
In this paper, we presented MusAE, a novel recurrent AAE that is
meant to assist artists by providing a tool for intuitive editing of the
musical properties of songs. We showed that an accurate choice of
the latent space’s prior distribution can considerably improve the
model performance, thus avoiding the typical drawbacks entailed
6 http://bit.ly/MusAE_latent
by a more complex architecture. Empirical comparisons with simi-
lar models show that MusAE has higher reconstruction accuracy of
musical sequences than its competitors. Latent space interpolations
are smooth and form a convincing transition between the starting
and the ending bar. This is a sign that the latent space does not have
“holes”, i.e. regions with no direct correspondence in the data space.
The latent space seems instead to be evenly populated, and the latent
factors are able to generate realistic sequences, independently from
the speciﬁc part of the latent space they have been sampled from.
The experiments showed that the model is indeed able to organise its
latent space according to low-level characteristics of the pianorolls,
and yet embedding high-level information about musical genres.
Despite having conﬁrmed our initial hypothesis, this line of re-
search is still at its initial stages and many improvements are possi-
ble and worthy of being considered. In the following part of this sec-
tion, we outline some possible future research directions. While we
showed that the latent space is able to take into account genre infor-
mation when encoding the pianorolls, we still lack a way to leverage
such information in a way that allows us to perform effective style
transfer between genres in a principled and reliable way. A possible
approach for tackling this problem could be trying to ﬁnd a way to
disentangle genre (i.e. style) information from content information in
the latent representations. Effective disentanglement of the relevant
musical properties can also be beneﬁcial for improving the effective-
ness of the model as a smart music editor, for it is usually of interest
for the artist to affect only a single speciﬁc property, whilst leaving
all the other ones mostly untouched (although sometimes a certain
degree of entanglement can be useful for maintaining the overall co-
herence of the musical piece). Finally, the additional ﬂexibility of
the AAE regarding the choice of prior distributions can be leveraged
even further: for example, it might be useful to have one or more
additional sets of latent factor, each one following different prior dis-
tributions, to incorporate different relevant metadata information into
the latent space. In the end, we believe that by explicitly representing
genre information into the latent space, our method can be a ﬁrst step
towards a principled solution to one of the most interesting problems
in automatic music generation, that is, genre style transfer.
