The Libra Toolkit for Probabilistic Models
The Libra Toolkit for Probabilistic Models
Daniel Lowd

Department of Computer and Information Science
University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403, USA
Amirmohammad Rooshenas

Department of Computer and Information Science
University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403, USA
Editor: ??
Abstract
The Libra Toolkit is a collection of algorithms for learning and inference with discrete proba-
bilistic models, including Bayesian networks, Markov networks, dependency networks, and
sum-product networks. Compared to other toolkits, Libra places a greater emphasis on
learning the structure of tractable models in which exact inference is eﬃcient. It also in-
cludes a variety of algorithms for learning graphical models in which inference is potentially
intractable, and for performing exact and approximate inference. Libra is released under a
2-clause BSD license to encourage broad use in academia and industry.
Keywords:
Probabilistic graphical models, structure learning, inference
1. Introduction
The Libra Toolkit is a collection of algorithms for learning and inference with probabilistic
models in discrete domains.
What distinguishes Libra from other toolkits is the types
of methods and models it supports. Libra includes a number of algorithms for structure
learning for tractable probabilistic models in which exact inference can be done eﬃciently.
Such models include sum-product networks (SPN), mixtures of trees (MT), and Bayesian
and Markov networks with compact arithmetic circuits (AC). These learning algorithms are
not available in any other open-source toolkit. Libra also supports structure learning for
graphical models, such as Bayesian networks (BN), Markov networks (MN), and dependency
networks (DN), in which inference is not necessarily tractable. Some of these methods are
unique to Libra as well, such as using dependency networks to learn Markov networks. Libra
provides a variety of exact and approximate inference algorithms for answering probabilistic
queries in learned or manually speciﬁed models. Many of these are designed to exploit local
structure, such as conjunctive feature functions or tree-structured conditional probability
distributions.
The overall goal of Libra is to make these methods available to researchers, practition-
ers, and students for use in experiments, applications, and education. Each algorithm in
Libra is implemented in a command-line program suitable for interactive use or scripting,
with consistent options and ﬁle formats throughout the toolkit. Libra also supports the de-
1
arXiv:1504.00110v1  [cs.LG]  1 Apr 2015

Lowd and Rooshenas
Learning General Models
◦
BN structure with tree CPDs
(Chickering et al., 1997)
DN structure with tree/boosted tree/LR CPDs
(Heckerman et al., 2000)
•
MN structure from DNs
(Lowd, 2012)
MN parameters (pseudo-likelihood)
Learning Tractable Models
•
Tractable BN/AC structure
(Lowd and Domingos, 2008)
•
Tractable MN/AC structure
(Lowd and Rooshenas, 2013)
•
Mixture of trees (MT)
(Meila and Jordan, 2000)
•
SPN structure (ID-SPN algorithm)
(Rooshenas and Lowd, 2014)
Chow-Liu algorithm
(Chow and Liu, 1968)
•
AC parameters (maximum likelihood)
Approximate Inference
Gibbs sampling (BN,MN,•DN)
(Heckerman et al., 2000) (DN)
Mean ﬁeld (BN,MN,•DN)
(Lowd and Shamaei, 2011) (DN)
Loopy belief propagation (BN,MN)
Max-product (BN,MN)
Iterated conditional modes (BN,MN,•DN)
•
Variational optimization of ACs
(Lowd and Domingos, 2010)
Exact Inference
◦
AC variable elimination (BN,MN)
(Chavira and Darwiche, 2007)
◦
Marginal and MAP inference (AC,SPN,MT)
(Darwiche, 2003)
Table 1: Learning and inference algorithms implemented in Libra. Filled circles (•) indicate
algorithms that are unique to Libra, and hollow circles (◦) indicate algorithms with
no other open-source implementation.
velopment of new algorithms through modular code organization, including shared libraries
for diﬀerent representations and ﬁle formats.
Libra is available under a modiﬁed (2-clause) BSD license, which allows modiﬁcation
and reuse in both academia and industry.
2. Functionality
Libra includes a variety of learning and inference algorithms, many of which are not available
in any other open-source toolkit. See Table 1 for a brief overview.
Libra’s command-line syntax is designed to be simple. For example, to learn a tractable
BN, run the command: “libra acbn -i train.data -mo model.bn -o model.ac” where
train.data is the input data, model.bn is the ﬁlename for saving the learned BN, and
model.ac is the ﬁlename for the corresponding AC representation, which allows for ef-
ﬁcient, exact inference.
To compute exact conditional marginals in the learned model:
“libra acquery -m model.ac -ev test.ev -marg”. To compute approximate marginals
in the BN with loopy belief propagation: “libra bp -m model.bn -ev test.ev”. Addi-
tional command-line parameters can be used to specify other options, such as the priors
and heuristics used by acbn or the maximum number of iterations for bp. These are just
three of more than twenty commands included in Libra.
Libra supports a variety of ﬁle formats. For data instances, Libra uses comma separated
values, where each value is a zero-based index indicating the discrete value of the corre-
sponding variable. For evidence and query ﬁles, unknown or missing values are represented
2

The Libra Toolkit for Probabilistic Models
Representation
Inference
Learning
Toolkit
Model Types
Factors
Exact
Approx.
Param.
Structure
Libra
BN,MN,DN,SPN,AC
Tree,Feature
ACVE
G,BP,MF
ML,PL
BN,. . . ,AC
FastInf
BN,MN
Table
JT
Many
ML,EM
-
libDAI
BN,MN
Table
JT,E
Many
ML,EM
-
OpenGM2
BN,MN
Sparse
-
Many
-
-
Banjo
BN,DBN
Table
-
-
-
BN
BNT
BN,DBN,ID
LR,OR,NN
JT,VE,E
G,LW,BP
ML,EM
BN
Deal
BN
Table
-
-
-
BN
OpenMarkov
BN,MN,ID
Tree,ADD,OR
JT
LW
ML
BN,MN
SMILE
BN,DBN,ID
Table
JT
Sampling
ML,EM
BN
UnBBayes
BN,ID
Table
JT
G,LW
-
BN
Table 2: Comparison of Libra to several other probabilistic inference and learning toolkits.
with the special value “*”. For model ﬁles, Libra supports the XMOD representation from
the WinMine Toolkit, the Bayesian interchange format (BIF), and the simple representation
from the UAI inference competition. Libra converts among these diﬀerent formats using
the provided mconvert utility, as well as to its own internal formats for BNs, MNs, and
DNs (.bn, .mn, .dn). Libra has additional representations for ACs and SPNs (.ac, .spn).
These formats are designed to be easy for humans to read and programs to parse.
Libra is implemented in OCaml. OCaml is a statically typed language that supports
functional and imperative programming styles, compiles to native machine code on multiple
platforms, and uses type inference and garbage collection to reduce programmer errors and
eﬀort.
OCaml has a good foreign function interface, which Libra uses for linking to C
libraries and implementing some memory-intensive subroutines more eﬃciently in C. The
code to Libra includes nine support libraries, which provide modules for input, output, and
representation of diﬀerent types of models, as well as commonly used algorithms and utility
methods.
3. Comparison to Other Toolkits
In Table 2, we compare Libra to other toolkits in terms of representation, learning, and
inference.
In terms of representation, Libra is the only open-source software package that supports
ACs and one of a very small number that support DNs or SPNs. Libra does not currently
support dynamic Bayesian networks (DBN) or inﬂuence diagrams (ID). For factors, Libra
supports tables, trees, and arbitrary conjunctive feature functions. BNT (Murphy, 2001)
and OpenMarkov (CISIAD, 2013) also support additional types of CPDs, such as logistic
regression, noisy-OR, neural networks, and algebraic decision diagrams, but they only sup-
port tabular CPDs for structure learning. OpenGM2 (Andres et al., 2012) supports sparse
factors, but iterates through all factor states during inference. Libra is unique in its ability
to learn models with local structure and exploit that structure in inference.
For exact inference, the most common algorithms are junction tree (JT), enumeration
(E), and variable elimination (VE). Libra provides ACVE (Chavira and Darwiche, 2007),
which is similar to building a junction tree, but it can exploit structured factors to run
inference in many high-treewidth models. For approximate inference, Libra provides Gibbs
3

Lowd and Rooshenas
Runtime (seconds)
Grid size 
BP−Libra
BP−libDAI
Gibbs−Libra
Gibbs−libDAI
  1
  10
  100
  1,000
  10,000
4x4
10x10
20x20
40x40
80x80
Figure 1: Running time of belief propagation and Gibbs sampling in Libra and libDAI,
evaluated on grid-structured MNs of various sizes.
sampling (G), loopy belief propagation (BP), and mean ﬁeld (MF), all of which are op-
timized for structured factors. A few learning toolkits oﬀer likelihood weighting (LW) or
additional sampling algorithms for BNs. FastInf (Jaimovich et al., 2010), libDAI (Mooij,
2010), and OpenGM2 oﬀer the most algorithms but only support tables.
For learning, Libra supports maximum likelihood (ML) parameter learning for BNs,
ACs, and SPNs, and pseudo-likelihood (PL) optimization for MNs and DNs. Libra does
not yet support expectation maximization (EM) for learning with missing values. Structure
learning is one of Libra’s greatest strengths.
Most toolkits only provide algorithms for
learning BNs with tabular CPDs or MNs using the PC algorithm (Spirtes et al., 1993). Libra
includes methods for learning BNs, MNs, DNs, SPNs, and ACs, and all of its algorithms
support learning with local structure.
In experiments on grid-structured MNs, Libra’s implementations of BP and Gibbs sam-
pling were at least as fast as libDAI, a popular C++ implementation of many inference
algorithms. The accuracy of both toolkits was equivalent. Parameter settings, such as the
number of iterations, were identical. See Figure 1 for more details.
4. Conclusion
The Libra Toolkit provides algorithms for learning and inference in a variety of probabilistic
models, including BNs, MNs, DNs, SPNs, and ACs. Many of these algorithms are not
available in any other open-source software. Libra’s greatest strength is its support for
tractable probabilistic models, for which very little other software exists. Libra makes it
easy to use these state-of-the-art methods in experiments and applications, which we hope
will accelerate the development and deployment of probabilistic methods.
