ARXIV
1
A Uniﬁed Granular-ball Learning Model of Pawlak
Rough Set and Neighborhood Rough Set
Shuyin Xia, Cheng Wang, Guoyin Wang*, Senior Member, IEEE, Weiping Ding*, Senior Member, IEEE,
Xinbo Gao, Senior Member, IEEE, Jianhang Yu, Yujia Zhai, Zizhong Chen, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Pawlak rough set and neighborhood rough set are
the two most common rough set theoretical models. Pawlawk
can use equivalence classes to represent knowledge, but it cannot
process continuous data; neighborhood rough sets can process
continuous data, but it loses the ability of using equivalence
classes to represent knowledge. To this end, this paper presents
a granular-ball rough set based on the granular-ball computing.
The granular-ball rough set can simultaneously represent Pawlak
rough sets, and the neighborhood rough set, so as to realize the
uniﬁed representation of the two. This makes the granular-ball
rough set not only can deal with continuous data, but also can
use equivalence classes for knowledge representation. In addition,
we propose an implementation algorithms of granular-ball rough
sets. The experimental resuts on benchmark datasets demonstrate
that, due to the combination of the robustness and adaptability
of the granular-ball computing, the learning accuracy of the
granular-ball rough set has been greatly improved compared
with the Pawlak rough set and the traditional neighborhood
rough set. The granular-ball rough set also outperforms nine
popular or the state-of-the-art feature selection methods. All
codes have been released in the open source GBRS library at
http://www.cquptshuyinxia.com/GBRS.html.
Index Terms—Feature Selection, Attribute reduction, Neigh-
borhood rough sets, Granular computing, Granular-ball com-
puting
I. INTRODUCTION
W
ITH the advent of the era of big data, both the
feasible size of datasets has grown explosively and the
dimensionality of the data has increased dramatically[1], [2].
In machine learning and related ﬁelds, high dimensionality
slows the training speeds of models and heightens the difﬁ-
culty of the learning task. High dimensionality can lead to
overﬁtting, which reduces the generalizability of a model [3],
[4]. At high dimensions, Euclidean distance fails as a usable
metric, limiting the application range of models that rely on
Euclidean distance [5], [6], [7], [8], [9]. Feature engineering
was developed in response to these substantial problems [10],
[11]. Feature selection is one of the most well-known methods
in feature engineering, which aims to select a subset of the
feature set that can replace the original feature set. Feature
S. Xia, C. Wang, G. Wang, X. Gao & J. Yu are with the Chongqing
Key
Laboratory
of
Computational
Intelligence,
Chongqing
University

W. Ding is with the School of Information Science and Technology, Nan-

sponding author).
Y. Zhai and Z. Chen are with the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, University of California at Riverside, Riverside, CA 92521, USA.

selection has signiﬁcant remedial effect: it can reduce feature
dimension, increasing the training speed of a model; it can
prevent overﬁtting, improving the generalizability of a model;
and it can increase the correlation between features and
predictions, making the model more interpretive[12], [13].
Feature selection methods can be divided into three cate-
gories: ﬁlter methods, wrapper methods, and embedded meth-
ods. Filter methods score features according to evaluation
criteria, then sort the features in descending order according
to an assigned score. Evaluation criteria usually fall in one of
four categories: distance measures, information measures, de-
pendence measures, and consistency measures [14]. Wrapper
methods treat feature selection as a feature subset optimization
process, and use a classiﬁer to evaluate feature subsets. Since
each feature subset needs to train a classiﬁer, most wrapper
methods are inefﬁcient, and research into wrapper methods
therefore usually focuses on the optimization process. Embed-
ded methods embed feature selection into the training process
of the learning algorithm to screen out which features are
important for model training[15], [16].
Feature selection algorithms based on rough set theory rely
on attribute reduction, which classes them as a ﬁlter method.
Rough set theory was proposed by Polish scientist Zdzisław
Pawlak in 1982 [17]. It is an effective mathematical tool
to process uncertain, inconsistent, and incomplete data that
has been widely applied in data mining, machine learning,
decision support system, and other application ﬁelds [18], [19],
[20], [21], [22], [23], [24]. The classical rough set is also
called Pawlak rough set. Pawlak rough set theory achieves
this utility by using an equivalence relation to divide samples
into several equivalence classes, and then deﬁning upper and
lower approximation sets using the union of the equivalence
classes[17]. The upper and lower approximations are used to
describe and approximate uncertain concepts, and samples are
divided into a positive region, boundary region and negative
region during this process. The number of samples in the
positive region is used to measure the dependence of a label
on the feature set; that is, the score of the feature set. Heuristic
attribute reduction algorithms based on rough set theory can
effectively reduce the time complexity of high dimensional
problems, making this a rich ﬁeld of research in recent decades
[25], [26], [27], [28], [29], [30], [31].
Pawlak rough set (PRS) and neighborhood rough set (NRS)
are two most popular rough set theories. In the feature selec-
tion process, PRS granulates a dataset based on equivalence
classes. An equivalence class consists of a set of attributes
and a set of objects, and can describe certain knowledge. So,
arXiv:2201.03349v4  [cs.AI]  14 Jul 2022

ARXIV
2
it provides good interpretability. However, this also results in
that it only can process discrete data. Data in the real world
is mostly continuous data, the discretization of which will
inevitably cause loss of information, thus presenting a serious
hindrance to the development and application of rough set
theory. To solve this problem, Hu, Yu, and Xie proposed the
NRS model [32] based on the idea of Lin’s neighborhood
model [33]. NRS uses a neighborhood relation instead of an
equivalence relation to granulate datasets, thus enabling NRS
to process continuous data directly. However, in the model of
NRS, the unpper and lower approximations of the NRS consist
of sample points instead of equivalence classes, so the NRS
loses interpretability. Besides, the inconsistency between PRS
and NRS makes rough set theory not concise enough.
Our main contributions are as follows:
1) We proposed an novel rough set model called granular-
ball rough set for unifying PRS and NRS by introducing
granular-ball into the rough set theory.
2) The proposed granular-ball rough set is the ﬁrst rough
set model that can naturally process continuous data
while having the interpretability of equivalence classes.
3) Due to the combination of the robustness and adaptabil-
ity of the granular-ball computing, the learning accuracy
of the granular-ball rough set has been greatly improved
compared with the PRS and NRS. The granular-ball
rough set also outperforms other seven popular or the
state-of-the-art feature selection methods.
4) As the GBRS can use equivalence class to represent
upper and lower approximation while processing con-
tinuous data, we further proposed a granular-ball rough
concept tree. This makes GBRS a strong mining tool that
can process continuous data and realize feature selection,
knowledge representation and classiﬁcation at the same
time.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: we introduce
related works in Section II. The theory basis of granular-ball
rough set is presented in Section III. Section IV details our
newly-proposed granular-ball rough set (GBRS) model, and
experimental results and analysis are presented in Section V.
We present our conclusion in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
Rough set is mainly used for feature selection. So, in this
section, we present a more detailed discussion of the prior
work in the three categories of feature selection methods, as
well as rough set theory.
A. Filter Methods
The essence of ﬁlter methods is to use statistical indicators
to score features, such as the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient,
the Gini coefﬁcient, the Kullback-Leibler divergence, the
Fisher score, similarity measures, and so forth. Since ﬁlter
methods only use the dataset itself and do not rely on speciﬁc
classiﬁers, they are very versatile and are easy to expand.
When compared with wrapper and embedded methods, ﬁlter
methods generally have a lower algorithm complexity. At
the same time, the classiﬁcation accuracy of ﬁlter methods
is usually lowest among the three types of methods. Filter
methods also only score a single feature, rather than an entire
feature subset, and thus the feature subset generated by ﬁlter
methods usually has high redundancy.
Gu, Li, and Han proposed a generalized Fisher score
feature selection method, aiming to ﬁnd a feature subset
that maximizes the lower bound of the Fisher score [34].
This method transforms feature selection into quadratically-
constrained linear program, and uses a cutting plane algorithm
to solve the problem. Roffo and Melzi proposed a feature
selection method based on graphs, ranking the most important
features based on recognition as arbitrary clue sets [35]. This
method maps feature selection to an afﬁnity graph by assigning
features as nodes, and then evaluates the importance of each
node via eigenvector centrality. In a later work, Roffo proposed
the Inf-FS feature selection method, which assigns features as
nodes of a graph and views feature subsets as paths in the
graph [36]. The power series property of matrices is used to
evaluate the path, and the computational complexity is reduced
by adding paths until the length reaches inﬁnity.
B. Wrapper Methods
Wrapper methods use learning algorithms to evaluate fea-
tures, and the classiﬁcation accuracy of wrapper methods is
often higher than that of ﬁlter methods. At the same time,
the classiﬁer used for evaluation limits the method, and the
feature subset obtained by wrapper methods tends to have
lower versatility. For each feature subset, a wrapper method
needs to train a classiﬁer, resulting in a high computational
complexity which depends on the search strategy of the
feature subset. However, wrapper methods do evaluate the
entire feature subset rather than a single feature and take into
account the dependency between features, so the redundancy
of the resulting feature subset is often lower than that of ﬁlter
methods.
The support vector machine (SVM) is a commonly used
learning algorithm in wrapper methods. Guyon, Weston, Barn-
hill, and Vapnik proposed a feature selection method using
SVM in combination with recursive feature elimination [37].
The method constructs the ranking coefﬁcient of features
according to the weight vector generated by the SVM during
training. In each iteration, the feature with the smallest ranking
coefﬁcient is removed, and ﬁnally a sort of all features in
descending order is obtained. Guo, Kong, and He proposed
a feature selection method based on clustering, which uses
a triplet-based ordinal locality-preserving loss function to
capture the local structures of the original data [38]. The
method deﬁnes an alternating optimization algorithm based
on half-quadratic minimization to speed up the optimization
process of this algorithm. Guo and Zhu speciﬁcally developed
another wrapper method, Dependence Guided Unsupervised
Feature Selection (DGUFS), to overcome the problem of sin-
gle feature selection in ﬁltering methods, using a joint learning
framework for feature selection and clustering [39]. DGUFS
is a projection-free feature selection model based on L2,0-
norm equality constraints and two deﬁned dependence-guided
terms which increase the correlation between the original data,
cluster labels, and the selected features.

ARXIV
3
C. Embedded Methods
Embedded methods embed feature selection into the learn-
ing algorithm, and the feature subset can be obtained when the
training process of the learning algorithm has completed. This
type of method is similar to ﬁlter methods, but the score of
each feature is determined through model training. The idea
behind these methods is to select those features important to
the training of the model during the process of determining the
model. Embedded methods are a compromise between ﬁlter
methods and wrapper methods. Compared to ﬁlter methods,
embedded methods can achieve a higher classiﬁcation accu-
racy; compared to wrapper methods, embedded methods have
lower algorithm complexity and are not as prone to overﬁtting.
Bradley and Mangasarian proposed an embedded feature
selection method based on concave minimization and SVM
[40]. This method ﬁnds a separation plane which distinguishes
two point sets in the n-dimensional feature space while using
as few features as possible. This method not only minimizes
the weighted sum of the distance between incorrectly classiﬁed
points and the boundary plane, but also maximizes the distance
between the two boundary planes of the separation plane.
Embedded methods are often based on regression learning
algorithms. Nie, Huang, Cai, and Ding proposed an efﬁcient
and robust feature selection method using a loss function
based on L2,1-norms to remove outliers [41]. This method
adopts joint L2,1-norm minimization on the loss function and
regularization, and proposes an effective algorithm to solve
joint L2,1-norm minimization problems. Yang et al. proposed
a feature selection method, Unsupervised Discriminative Fea-
ture Selection (UDFS), which also uses the L2,1-norm [42].
UDFS optimizes an L2,1-norm regularized minimization loss
function, which uses discriminative information and the local
structure of the data distribution.
D. Rough Set Theory
Feature selection methods based on rough set theory belong
to the category of ﬁltering methods. These methods use
the positive region from rough set theory to score features.
PRS granulates a dataset based on an equivalence relation,
which provides good interpretability. his also result in that
it only can process discrete data. However, data in the real
world is mostly continuous data. Much research has been
poured into overcoming the inability of rough set theory to
process continuous data. This research can be roughly divided
into two categories: discretizing continuous data or proposing
improved rough set models. For decades, rough set models
based on data discretization have proliferated [43], [44], [45].
But the discretization of data will inevitably lead to the
loss of information, and the discretization results will change
with the discretization method. In light of this, some have
proposed improved rough set models that can directly process
continuous data. Dubois and Prade combine rough sets with
another concept, fuzzy sets [46], and propose fuzzy rough sets
[47], which replace the equivalence relation of classic rough
sets with a fuzzy similarity relation, so that fuzzy rough sets
can process continuous data. However, fuzzy rough set models
need to set a membership function in advance using a priori
knowledge of the dataset, which reduces the generality of
fuzzy rough sets.
In contrast to fuzzy rough sets, NRS [32] use a neighbor-
hood relation to describe the relationships between samples.
This neighborhood relation is completely derived from the data
distribution and does not require any priori knowledge. At the
same time, NRS can also process continuous data directly.
Because of these advantages to NRS models, the ﬁeld of NRS
has been under continuous study and development. Li and Xie
propose a method to accelerate NRS which based on an incre-
mental attribute subset [48]. Gao, Liu, and Ji use a matrix to
preserve measurement calculation results, requiring only one
dimension measurement calculation after a dimension increase
and thereby reducing the amount of calculations require to ﬁnd
the positive region [49]. In NRS, the neighborhood radius is
a parameter that has a large impact on the reduction results
and must be artiﬁcially set; how this parameter is chosen is
also a frequent study of research. Peng, Liu, and Ji designed
a ﬁtness function, which combines the properties of datasets
and classiﬁers to select the optimal neighborhood radius from
a given neighborhood radius interval [50]. Xia et al. propose
an adaptive NRS model by combining granular ball computing
with NRS, which can automatically optimize the neighborhood
radius [51]. Above NRS methods use a neighborhood relation
instead of an equivalence relation to granulate datasets, thus
enabling NRS to process continuous data directly. However, in
the model of NRS, the unpper and lower approximations of the
NRS consist of sample points instead of equivalence classes,
so the NRS loses interpretability. Besides, the inconsistency
between PRS and NRS makes rough set theory not concise
enough. In this paper, We propose a novel rough set model
named granular-ball rough set (GBRS) which can unify PRS
and NRS. It not only has the interpretability of equivalence
classes but can process continuous data naturally.
III. THE THEORY BASIS OF GRANULAR-BALL ROUGH SET
In this section, in order to lay a foundation for our theorem
and proof, we review some of the basic concepts of PRS and
NRS, which have been presented in our previous work [51].
In addition, granular-ball computing is the main basis of the
proposed method, so we also introduce it in this section.
A. Pawlak Rough Set
We ﬁrst introduce information system and indiscernible
relation.
Deﬁnition 1. [51] Let a quaternion ⟨U, A, V, f⟩represent
an information system where:
U = {x1, x2, ..., xn} denotes a non-empty ﬁnite set of
objects. U is called the universe;
A = {a1, a2, ..., am} denotes a non-empty ﬁnite set of
attributes;
V = S
a∈A Va denotes the set of all attribute values, where
Va denotes the value range of attribute a;
f = U ×A →V denotes a mapping function: ∀xi ∈U, a ∈
A, f (xi, a) ∈Va.

ARXIV
4
This information system is called a decision system
⟨U, C, D⟩if the set of attributes in the information system
above satisﬁes A = C ∪D, C ∩D = Ø, and D ̸= Ø, where
C is the condition attribute set and D is the decision attribute
set.
Deﬁnition 2. [51] Let ⟨U, A, V, f⟩be an information system.
∀x, y ∈U and B ⊆A, the indiscernible relation IND(B) of
the attribute subset B is deﬁned as
IND(B)={(x, y) ∈U×U|f(x, a) = f(y, a), ∀a ∈B}. (1)
In PRS algorithms, f(x, a) = Va(x) represents x’s value
on the attribute a. So, f(x, a) = f(y, a) represents that the
sample x has the same value with the sample y on the attribute
a. In fact, (x, y) ∈IND(B) shows that the values of samples
x and y are the same under the attribute subset B; that is,
under the description of the attribute subset B, samples x and
y are indiscernible.
IND(B) is symmetric, reﬂexive, and transitive; that is,
∀B ⊆A, IND(B) is an equivalence relation on U (abbre-
viated as RB). IND(B) creates a partition of U, denoted
U/IND(B) and abbreviated as U/B. The characteristics of
U/B are as follows: Suppose U/B = {X1, X2, ..., Xk}, if
Xi, Xj ⊆U, Xi ∩Xj = Ø(i ̸= j), and Sk
i=1 Xi = U,
then U is divided into k parts by IND(B). An element
[x]B = {y ∈U|(x, y) ∈IND(B)} in U/B is called an
equivalence class. This leads us to our next set of deﬁnitions,
approximations based on the equivalence relation RB.
Deﬁnition 3. [51] Let ⟨U, A, V, f⟩be an information system.
∀B ⊆A, there is a corresponding equivalence relation RB on
U. Then, ∀X ⊆U, the upper and lower approximation of X
with respect to B are deﬁned as follows:
RBX = ∪{[x]B ∈U/B|[x]B ∩X ̸= ∅} ,
(2)
RBX = ∪{[x]B ∈U/B|[x]B ⊆X} .
(3)
The lower approximation RBX represents the set of samples
in U that are determined to belong to X according to the
equivalence relation RB. It essentially reﬂects the ability of
the equivalence relation RB to approximately describe the
knowledge contained in X by a partition of the knowledge
of the universe U. It is also commonly called the B positive
region of X in U, which is abbreviated as POSB(X).
Deﬁnition 4. [51] Let ⟨U, C, D⟩be a decision system. We
notate the partition of the universe U by the decision attribute
set D into L equivalence classes by U/D = {X1, X2, ..., XL}.
∀B ⊆C, there is a corresponding equivalence relation RB on
U. The upper and the lower approximation of D with respect
to B are respectively deﬁned as
RBD =
L
[
i=1
RBXi,
(4)
RBD =
L
[
i=1
RBXi.
(5)
Deﬁnition 5. [51] Let ⟨U, C, D⟩be a decision system. ∀B ⊆
C, the positive region and boundary region of D with respect
to B are respectively deﬁned as:
POSB (D) = RBD,
(6)
BNB (D) = RBD −RBD.
(7)
The size of the positive region reﬂects the separability of
the classiﬁcation problem in a given attribute space. The larger
the positive region, the more detailed the classiﬁcation problem
can be described using this attribute set. We ﬁnd it useful to
describe this mathematically: the dependence of D on B is
deﬁned as
γB (D) = |POSB (D)|
|U|
,
(8)
where |·| is the cardinality of the set and 0 ≤γB (D) ≤
1. Obviously, the larger the positive region, the stronger the
dependence of D on B.
The dependency function deﬁnes the contribution of con-
ditional attributes to a classiﬁcation, so it can be used as an
evaluation index for the importance of the attribute set.
Deﬁnition 6. [51] Given a decision system ⟨U, C, D⟩, ∀B ⊆
C and ∀a ∈(C −B), the importance of a relative to B is
deﬁned as
SIG (a, B, D) = γB∪a (D) −γB (D) .
(9)
Rough set uses the measurement SIG in (9) to select at-
tributes in a forward way. The selection result C′ is initialized
with Ø, and for each attribute a in the attribute C −C′, that
with the largest value of SIG(a, C′, D) which should be larger
than 0 is select into C′. This process is repeated until all
SIG(a, C′, D) is not greater than 0.
B. Neighborhood Rough Set
After introducing NRS somewhat loosely, we now drill
down into the details, deﬁning the basic spaces we are op-
erating in, the neighborhoods we are working with in NRS,
and the positive region we have mentioned, which is key to
the operation of these methods.
Deﬁnition 7. [51] Let ∆: Ω× Ω→R be a function
generated on a set Ω. ⟨Ω, ∆⟩is known as a metric space if ∆
satisﬁes:
(1) ∆(x1, x2) ≥0, ∆(x1, x2) = 0 if x1=x2, ∀x1, x2 ∈Ω;
(2) ∆(x1, x2) = ∆(x2, x1) , ∀x1, x2 ∈Ω;
(3) ∆(x1, x3) ≤∆(x1, x2) + ∆(x2, x3) , ∀x1, x2, x3 ∈Ω.
In this case, ∆is known as a metric.
Deﬁnition 8. [51] Let U = {x1, x2, ..., xn} be a non-empty
ﬁnite set of real space. ∀xi ∈U, the δ-neigborhood of xi is
deﬁned as:
δ (xi) = {x | x ∈U, ∆(x, xi) ≤δ} ,
(10)
where δ ≥0.
Deﬁnition 9. [51] Let ⟨U, C, D⟩be a neighborhood de-
cision system. The decision attribute set D divides U into
L equivalence classes: X1, X2, ..., XL. ∀B ⊆C, the lower
approximation and the upper approximation of the decision
attribute set D with respect to the condition attribute set B
are respectively deﬁned as:
NBD =
L
[
i=1
NBXi,
(11)

ARXIV
5
Fig. 1. Process of granular-ball generation in granular-ball computing.
NBD =
L
[
i=1
NBXi,
(12)
where NBXi
= {xk | δB (xk) ⊆Xi, xk ∈U}, NBXi
=
{xk | δB (xk) T Xi ̸= Ø, xk ∈U}, and its positive region and
boundary region are respectively deﬁned as POSB (D) =
NBD, BN (D) = NBD −NBD.
C. Granular-ball Computing
Combining the theoretical basis of traditional granular com-
puting, and based on the research results published by Chen
in Science in 1982, he pointed out that “human cognition
has the characteristics of large-scale priority” [52], Wang put
forward a lot of granular cognitive computing[53]. Based on
granular cognitive computing, granular-ball computing is a
new, efﬁcient and robust granular computing method proposed
by Xia and Wang [54], the core idea of which is to use
“granular-balls” to cover or partially cover the sample space.
A granular-ball GB = {xi, i = 1...N}, where xi represents
the objects in GB, and N is the number of objects in GB.
GB’s center C and radius r are respectively represented as
follows
C = 1
N
N
X
i=1
xi,
(13)
r = 1
N
N
X
i=1
|xi −C|.
(14)
This means that the radius is equal to the average distance from
all objects in GB to its center. The radius can also be set to
the maximum distance. The “granular-ball” with a center and
radius are used as the input of the learning method or as ac-
curate measurements to represent the sample space, achieving
multigranularity learning characteristics (that is, scalability,
multiple scales, etc.) and the accurate characterization of the
sample space. The basic process of granular-ball generation for
classiﬁcation problems in granular-ball computing is shown in
Figure 1.
As shown in Figure 1, to similiate the “the characteristics
of large-scale priority of human cognition” at the beginning of
the algorithm, the whole dataset can be regarded as a granular-
ball. At this time, the purity of the granular-ball is the worst
and cannot describe any distribution characteristics of the data.
The “purity” is used to measure the quality of a granular-
ball [54]. It is equal to the proportion of the most labels in
the granular-ball. Then, the number of labels m of different
classes in the granular-ball is counted, and the granular-ball
can be split into m granular-balls. The next step is to calculate
the purity of each granular-ball. This is the key step, because
purity is the criterion for evaluating whether a granular-ball
needs to continue to split. As the splitting process continues
to advance, the purity of the granular-balls increases, and
the decision boundary becomes increasingly clearer; until the
purity of all granular-balls meets the requirements, the bound-
ary is clearest, and the algorithm converges. The granular-
ball computing has developed granular-ball classiﬁers [54],
granular-ball clustering [55], granular-ball neighborhood rough
set [51] and granular-ball sampling methods [56].
IV. GRANULAR-BALL ROUGH SETS
A. Motivation
The main difference of upper or lower approximation be-
tween the model of PRS and NRS is that, as shown in
Deﬁnition 3 and Deﬁnition 10 respectively, the former consists
of equivalence classes, which can be used to represent knowl-
edge and has the interpretability; however, the latter consists
of sample points, which has no interpretability. If we want
to use equivalence classes to describe the upper and lower
approximation of NRS, a straightforward approach is to treat
all objects in a neighborhood radius as an equivalence class.
However, we ﬁnd that this may make two equivalence classes
with different decision labels equal. We called this phenomen
as “heterogeneous transmission”. It can be described in detail
in Figure 2. As shown in Figure 2, according with the
Deﬁnition 10, those objects including x1, x3, x4, x5 belong
to positive region, and x2 belongs to boundary region. The
heterogeneous transmission appears in the intersecting area of
the neighborhood area of x4 and that of x5. The intersecting
area is called “transmission area”. When we deﬁne the objects
belong to a given neighborhood as a equivalence class, the
label of the neighborhood equivalence class of x4 is equal to
“+1”, and the label of the neighborhood equivalence class of
x5 is equal to “-1”. However, a new object x6 in transmission
area is equivalent to the neighborhood equivalence class of
x4 and that of x5 at the same time. This makes the two
equivalence classes with two different label equivalent. Ob-
viously, it is harmful for learning. To avoid the heterogeneous
transmission phenomena, a method is to set the neighborhood
radius small enough. However, this may make most of objects
or all objects always belong to positive region, and positive
region can not be effectively used for measuring feature
importance or other learning tasks. Overall, the heterogeneous
transmission phenomena is caused by the overlap between
those positive region neighborhoods with different labels in
NRS.
B. Granular-ball Rough Set
As shown in Fig. 3, as the neighborhood radii are adaptively
different, the overlap between those positive region neighbor-
hoods does not exist in granular-ball computing. Therefore, it
is possible to use equivalence classes to represent upper and
lower approximation by introducing granular-ball computing
to represent neighborhood. The granular-ball computing based

ARXIV
6
Fig. 2.
The phenomena of the heterogeneous transmission. The label of a
black circle point is equal to “+1”, and the label of a red plus point is equal
to “-1”. The triangle point x6 is a new test sample.
Fig. 3. The phenomena of the heterogeneous transmission in Fig. 2 is removed
using granular-ball computing.
rough set is called “granular-ball rough set”, and its models
are deﬁned and described as follows.
Deﬁnition 10. Let U = {x1, x2, ..., xn} be a non-empty
ﬁnite set of real space. ∀xi ∈U, a granular-ball GBj is deﬁned
as:
GBj = {x | x ∈U, ∆(x, cj) ≤rj, } ,
(15)
where cj and rj denote the center and the radius of GBj
respectively. The larger the ri, the coarser the granular-ball
GBj; otherwise, the ﬁner the granular-ball GBj.
Deﬁnition 11. Let ⟨U, A, V, f⟩be an information system.
∀x, y ∈U and B ⊆A, the indiscernible granular-ball relation
INDGB(B) of the attribute subset B is deﬁned as
INDGB(B)={(x, y) ∈U 2|f(x, a) = f(y, a) = GB, ∀a ∈B}.
(16)
If (x, y) ∈INDGB(B), the relationship between x and y is
denoted as x ∼y.
In granular-ball rough set, f(x, a) = GB, x ∈GB. So,
f(x, a) = f(y, a) = GB represents that x and y belong
to the same granular-ball under the given attribute set a.
∀B ⊆A, INDGB(B) is an equivalence relation on U
(abbreviated as GBRB). Because the granular-balls do not
overlap, GBIND(B) can also create a partition of U, denoted
U/GBIND(B) and abbreviated as U/GB(B). An element
[x]GB(B) = {y ∈U|(x, y) ∈INDGB(B)} in U/GB(B) is
an equivalence class generated by granular-ball computing.
Deﬁnition 12. Given an information system ⟨U, A, V, f⟩, if
GBi ∪GBj ̸= ∅, GBi ∼GBj.
As the overlap does not exist between those granular-
balls with different labels in GBRS, Deﬁnition 12 means
that those granular- balls with the same label belong to an
equivalence class. This kind of overlap between those positive
region neighborhoods, i.e., granular-balls, with a same label
is not considered in this method because it does not lead
to heterogeneous transmission and affect decision; besides,
considering this overlap in the algorithm design will increase
computation cost.
Properties
of
GBRS.
Given
an
information
system
⟨U, A, V, f⟩, x, y, z ∈U, B ⊆A, ∼represents the indis-
cernible granular-ball relation of the attribute subset B on
U. The indiscernible granular-ball relation obviously has the
following properties:
(1) Symmetry: if x ∼y, then y ∼x;
(2) Reﬂexivity: x ∼x ;
(3) Transitivity: if x ∼y, y ∼z, then x ∼z.
In summary, similar with that in PRS, INDGB(B) is
symmetric, reﬂexive, and transitive, and complete consistent
with IND(B) in PRS.
Based on the equivalence class [x]GB(B), the deﬁnitions of
positive region, upper and lower approximations are the same
to those in PRS. Therefore, GBRS has the consistent model
with the PRS. Their speciﬁc deﬁnitions are as follows:
Deﬁnition 13. Let ⟨U, A, V, f⟩be an information system.
∀B ⊆A, there is a corresponding equivalence relation GBRB
on U. Then, ∀X ⊆U, the upper and lower approximation of
X with respect to B are deﬁned as follows:
GBRBX = ∪

[x]B ∈U/GB(B)|[x]GB(B) ∩X ̸= ∅
	
,
(17)
GBRBX = ∪

[x]B ∈U/GB(B)|[x]GB(B) ⊆X
	
.
(18)
Deﬁnition 14. Let ⟨U, C, D⟩be a decision system. We
notate the partition of the universe U by the decision attribute
set D into L equivalence classes by U/D = {X1, X2, ..., XL}.
∀B ⊆C, there is a corresponding equivalence relation GBRB
on U. The upper and the lower approximation of D with
respect to B are respectively deﬁned as
GBRBD =
L
[
i=1
GBRBXi,
(19)
GBRBD =
L
[
i=1
GBRBXi.
(20)
According to Deﬁnition 14, a granular-ball whose purity is
equal to 1, i.e., that the samples in it have a same decision
label, belongs to lower approximation (i.e., the positive region
described in Deﬁnition 15) in a decision system.
Deﬁnition 15. Let ⟨U, C, D⟩be a decision system. ∀B ⊆C,
the positive region and boundary region of D with respect to
B are respectively deﬁned as:
POSB (D) = GBRBD,
(21)
BNB (D) = GBRBD −GBRBD.
(22)
Completely the same with that in the Pawlak rough set,
the size of the positive region reﬂects the separability of the
classiﬁcation problem in a given attribute space. The larger the
positive region, the more detailed the classiﬁcation problem

ARXIV
7
can be described using this attribute set. The dependence of
D on B and SIG (a, B, D) are also the same with that in
Pawlak rough set.
In the models of GBRS, when the radius of each granular-
ball is set to a inﬁnitely small positive number, GBRS is
transformed into PRS. When the PRS algorithm is designed
from the perspective of GBRS, it is called as granular-ball
PRS (GBPRS). GBPRS and PRS have the same experimental
results; however, their algorithm designs are different, and
the former generate eqivalence using granular-ball computing.
When the radius of each granular-ball is not set to a zero,
GBRS is transformed into granular-ball NRS (GBNRS). As
the GBNRS not only can use equivalence classes to represent
knowledge, but is much more efﬁcient than the traditional NRS
which contains many overlaps, the GBNRS can completely
replace the traditional NRS. In another word, the GBNRS
is the representive method of neighborhood rough set. In
summary, GBRS is an uniﬁed model of GBPRS and GBNRS.
In addition, as shown in Fig. 5(f), GBNRS can ﬂexibly
ﬁt the data distribution using those granular-balls with varies
radii, which is obviously better than those methods using a
ﬁxed radius, such as PRS and the traditional NRS. So, GBNRS
can achieve a higher accuracy than the two algorithms. More-
over, the combination of the robustness and adaptability of the
granular-ball computing is helpful for GBNRS to perform well
in accuracy. This robustness in the GBNRS is reﬂected in the
fact that, since the noise point will be in the small granular-
ball, the characteristics of a large neighborhood, i.e., whether
it belongs to positive region or not, will not be affected by
it. This robustness will not exist in other most methods, such
as the traditional NRS who has a ﬁxed radius. These will be
demonstrated in the experiments.
C. Implement of GBNRS
As the GBNRS has the uniﬁed model with the PRS, as
shown in Fig. 4, its whole algorithm process is completely the
same with that of the PRS. The only difference bewteen the
GBRS and PRS is the generation way of positive region, which
is shown in step 2 in Fig. 4. The GBRS generates positive
region using granular-balls. For the GBNRS, in the granular-
ball generation, to fulﬁlling deﬁnition 14, the purity threshold
PT is set to 1. Besides, referring to that in [57], the lower
bound of the size of a granular ball LBS, i.e., the number of
samples in it, is optimized from 2*d to 2 with a step as 1,
where the d denotes the number of conditional attributes in
the data set. When the size of a granular-ball is lower than
LBS or its purity reaches to 1, the granular ball stop to split.
According to Deﬁnition 15, a granular-ball whose purity is
equal to 1 belongs to positive region, and a granular-ball whose
purity is lower than 1 belongs to boundary region. Besides, to
decrease the randomness in the granular-ball generation and
make the positive region of the granular-balls in the attribute
selection process have better comparability, for a granular-ball,
the samples who have the smallest indexes in it are selected as
the initial centroids in this granular-ball splitting process. The
ﬂowchart is shown as Fig. 4. The speciﬁc process is mainly
composed of ﬁve steps.
Fig. 4. Process of attribute reduction in GBRS.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Fig. 5. The generation process of GBNRS on the dataset. The red points and
red granular-balls are labeled ‘+1’, and the green points and green granular-
balls are labeled ‘-1’. The purity threshold PT is 1 and LBS’s value is 4.
(a)-(e) The generation results of ﬁve iterations. (f) As a result of overlapping
on the basis of (e), the purity of black granular-balls is less than 1, and the
purity of red and green granular balls is 1.
Fig. 5 shows the granular-ball generation process of GB-
NRS. The red points and red granular-balls are labeled ‘+1’,
and the green points and green granular-balls are labeled ‘-
1’. Firstly, the whole dataset is regarded as a granular-ball,
it is divided into two granular-balls using 2-means because it
contains two different classes of samples in it, and as shown
in Fig. 5 (a). Fig. 5(b), (c), (d) and (e) are the intermediate
iteration results. For a granular-ball, if its purity < 1 and
its size ≥4, it continuous to be split. Fig. 5(e) contains the
phenomenon of heterogeneous transmission. It is eliminated by
spliting the heterogeneous overlapped granular-balls to remove
the overlap of heterogeneous balls, the results of which are
shown in Fig. 5(f). In Fig. 5(f), any pair of two heterogeneous

ARXIV
8
granular-balls do not contain any common samples. Besides, as
shown in Fig. 5(f), those granular-balls containing both green
and red sample points, i.e., those black granualr-balls, belong
to the boundary region.
D. Granular-ball Rough Concept Tree for Knowledge Repre-
sentation and Classiﬁcation
Fig. 6. Knowledge representation of the discrete dataset zoo using GBRCT.
As the GBRS can use equivalence class to represent upper
and lower approximation while processing continuous data,
it can represent knowledge well. In this section, we further
proposed the granular-ball rough concept tree (GBRCT) by
combing GBNRS with the rough concept tree [58], which is
proposed based on the concept lattice. RCT can not only be
used to organize and describe the knowledge rules obtained
by rough set based on forward attribute reduction algorithm,
but also can be used for classiﬁcation decision. So, the
GBRCT makes GBRS a strong mining tool that not only
can realize feature selection, but knowledge representation and
classiﬁcation at the same time.
In the RCT, each node is also called as a “knowledge point”,
or called “concept node”, consisting of two parts: a sequence
consisting of both some attributes and their values called
“intent”, and its corresponding equivalence classes called
“extent”. The “concept” consisting with “intent” and “extent”
is borrowed from philosophy for knowledge representation.
GBRS strictly divides the dataset by gradular-balls, so in the
GBRCT of this article, the representation of the ﬁrst row and
ﬁrst column of the “knowledge point” has two parts: “the
attribute value” and “the center and radius of the corresponding
gradular-ball”.
In the GBRCT, different from that in the RCT, the intent is
described using a granular-ball equivalence class consisting
of its center and radius instead of a sequence of attribute
values. The GBRCT generated on the discrete dataset zoo
is shown in Fig. 6, and that on the continuous dataset wine
is shown in Fig. 7. Because we know the data set zoo is
discrete in advance, that the neighberhood radius is smaller
than a inﬁnitely small positive value is used as the termination
condition of granular-ball splitting, and GBRS is converted to
be GBPRS. In Figs. 6 and 7, an orange node represents a
granular-ball equivalence class. A blue node who contains “?”
represents boundary region, and an orange node representing a
granular-ball belongs to the positive region that can certainly
describe knowledge. The dataset zoo is discrete, so that the
neighborhood radius is smaller than a inﬁnitely small positive
value is set to the termination condition of granular-ball
splitting. The result of GBRCT is very similar with that
using RCT except the represetation of the intent, i.e., the ﬁrst
row of each node. The RCT represents the intent using a
sequence of attibute values, but the GBRCT using a granular-
ball consisting of a center and a neighborhood radius whose
value is equal to zero as shown in Fig. 6; On the contrary, as
shown in Fig. 7, the neighborhood radius in the continious data
is larger than zero. This also indicates that the GBRS realize
the uniﬁed description for PRS and NRS well. In the real
scene, when the information whether the data set is discrete
or not is not provided in advance, an inﬁnitely positive value is
considered as an option to be optimized as the neighborhood
radius in the GBRS.
Similar with that in the RCT, the number in the right of a
layer of the GBRCT shows which attributes the concept nodes
in the layer are generated on; besides, those positive region
concept nodes containing the largest number of extent samples
have the strongest representation ability for knowledge and are
the most valuable, such as the second node in the second layer
and the second node in the third layer in Fig. 6. In addition,
as described in [58], the GBRCT can also be directly used for
classiﬁcation.
E. Algorithm Design
The only difference between the GBNRS and PRS is the
generation way of positive region, and the feature selection
process is the same because the GBNRS and PRS have
an uniﬁed representation model. So, we only discuss the
algorithm design of granular-ball generation for positive region
in this section, which is shown in Algorithm 1. The algorithm
1 mainly consists of two parts including initial granular-balls
generation and overlap removing. purity(GB) denotes the
purity of the granular-ball GB. In Step 16, there is overlap
between two granular-balls if their boudary distance is smaller
than zero, i.e,that, the distance between their centers is smaller
than sum of their radii. The process of spliting in Step 17 is the
similar with that in Step 6. In the output variable NOLGBs,
those granular-balls with purity as 1 belong to positive region.
The lower bound of the size of a granular ball LBS, i.e., the
number of samples in it, is optimized from 2*d to 2 with a step
as 1, where the d denotes the number of conditional attributes
in the data set.
V. EXPERIMENT
To demonstrate the feasibility and effectiveness of GBRS,
we selected some popular or the state-of-the-art algorithms
for comparison. As the experimental results using GBPRS are
the same with those using PRS, so the GBNRS is selected
for comparison. As the PRS can only process discrete data,
so we also need to conduct experiments on some discrete
data sets for comparison with PRS. As shown in Table I, we
randomly selected ﬁfteen real datasets including continuous
and discrete datasets to demonstrate the performance of the

ARXIV
9
Fig. 7. Knowledge representation of the continuous dataset wine using GBRCT.
GBNRS. Among them, the ﬁrst six are discrete datasets;
the last nine are continuous datasets. Experimental hardware

GHz with 32 G RAM. Experimental software environment:
Python 3.7.
The lower bound of the size of a granular ball LBS, i.e.,
the number of samples in it, is optimized from 2*d to 2 with
a step as 1, where the d denotes the number of conditional
attributes in the data set. The experiments are designed along
the lines of Xia et al. [51] as the quality of the reduced attribute
set is not related to the testing classiﬁer used, only a common
testing classiﬁer the nearest neighbor algorithm—is used to
verify the quality of the reduced attribute set. Therefore, we
use the common classiﬁer, kNN, in our experiment with 5-fold
cross-validation.
A. In Comparison with PRS under Discrete Data
The experimental results on the ﬁrst six discrete datasets
in Table I are shown in Table II, where the ”original” col-
umn represents the classiﬁcation accuracy obtained from the
original unreduced dataset. The ”NO” column in Table II is
corresponded with the ”NO” column in Table I. It can be seen
from Table II that, the classiﬁcation accuracy of GBNRS is
much higher than that of the PNS on most cases except the
case on the 4th data set, in which the accracies of the two
algorithms are the same. Considering the average classiﬁcation
accuracy, the original accuracy and PRS’s accuray are 0.8906
and 0.8618 respectively, while that of GBNRS is 0.8958; in
comparison with the previous two results, GBNRS achieved
0.52 and 3.4 percentage enhancement respectively. The reason
is that, the GBNRS can ﬂexibly ﬁt the data distribution using
those granular-balls with varies radii, which is obviously better
than those methods using a ﬁxed radius, such as PRS and the
traditional NRS. So, GBNRS can achieve a higher accuracy
than the two algorithms. In summary, analysis shows that on
discrete datasets, GBNRS can achieve higher classiﬁcation
accuracy than both the PRS and those on the original datasets.
B. In Comparsion with Varies Feature Selection Methods
in this section, we select nine continuous datasets whose
indexes are from 7 to 15 in Table I, and nine popular or
the-state-of-the-art algorithms for comparison including NRS
[59], GBNRSold [51], Cfs [37], Ilfs [1], Laplacian [60], Lasso
[61], Mrmr [15], WNRS [62]. The experimental results are
shown in Table III. The neighborhood radius δ is gradually
increased from 0.01 to 0.5 with a step size of 0.01, which
is commonly used in the NRS and WNRS. The method,
GBNRSold, also introduce granular-ball computing to decrease
the overlap in the traditional NRS, resulting in the efﬁciency
improvement. However, it did not realize the eqivalence repre-
sentation; so, we named it with ”old” as sufﬁx, i.e., GBNRSold,
for distinguishing it from our method GBNRS. As there is
randomness in the GBNRSold, we run GBNRS ten times,
and take the highest classiﬁcation accuracy among the ten
experiments results for comparison. The experimental results
are shown in Table III. It can be seen from Table III that,
in comparison with other algorithms, GBNRS can achieve
the highest classiﬁcation accuracy in seven datasets on most
cases. The reason is that the combination of the robustness and
adaptability of the granular-ball computing. The adaptability

ARXIV
10
Algorithm 1: Generation of granular-balls in the GB-
NRS
Input: A dataset D = {x1, x2, ..., xn}, the lower
bound of the size of the granular-ball LBS;
Output: NOLGBs;
1: The current granular-ball set CGBs and the
granular-ball set in the next iteration NGBs are
initialized with D and ∅;
// Generate the initial granular-balls
2: repeat
3:
CGBs = NGBs; NGBs = ∅;
4:
for each granular-ball GBi ∈CGBs do
5:
if purity(GBi) < 1 and |GBi| > LBS then
6:
Split GBi into k sub-granular-balls
{GB
′
j, j = 1, ..., k}, where k denotes the number
of different labels in GBi
7:
NGBs = NGBs + {GB
′
j}
8:
else
9:
NGBs = NGBs + GBi
10:
end if
11:
end for
12: until |NGBs| == |CGBs|
13: OLGBs = ∅; NOLGBs = ∅
//Remove the overlap between heterogeneous
granular-balls
14: repeat
15:
for each granular-ball GBi ∈CGBs do
16:
if there is overlap between GBi and GBj ∈CGBs
which has a different label then
17:
Split the larger granular-ball and add the
sub-granular-balls into OLGBs
18:
else
19:
NOLGBs = NOLGBs + GBi
20:
end if
21:
end for
22:
CGBs = OLGBs
23: until |OLGBs| = 0
makes GBNRS ﬂexibly ﬁt different data distributions using
those granular-balls with varies radii, resulting in a good
performance of GBNRS in accuracy.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper presents an uniﬁed model for the two most
popular rough set models, Pawlak rough set and neighborhood
rough set models. The uniﬁed model can not only express
knowledge with equivalence classes, but also deal with both
continuous data and discrete data. In comparison with nine
popular or the-state-of-the-art feature selection methods on
ﬁfteen real datasets, the experiments show that the proposed
model can achieve a better performance in accuracy. However,
the optimization of the LBS is inefﬁcient. If some incremental
strategies can be developed, it can be accelerated. In the future
work, we will developed the poposed model into other rough
set models and improve their performance.
TABLE I
DATASET INFORMATION
NO.
Dataset
Samples
Numerical
Condition
Attributes
Categorical
Condition
Attributes
Class
1
lymphography
148
0
18
4
2
primary-tumor
336
0
15
2
3
mushroom
7535
0
22
2
4
mushroom1
8124
0
22
2
5
zoo
101
0
16
7
6
backup-large
307
0
36
4
7
iono
351
34
0
2
8
Diabetes
768
8
0
2
9
wdbc
569
30
0
2
10
audit risk
772
21
0
2
11
electrical
10000
13
0
2
12
Parkinson Multiple
1040
27
0
2
Sound Recording
13
wine
178
13
0
3
14
spambase
4601
57
0
2
15
htru2
17898
8
0
2
TABLE II
ACCURACY COMPARISON ON DISCRETE DATASETS
NO.
Original
PRS
GBNRS
1
0.8101±0.0966
0.7489±0.0627
0.8161±0.0584
2
0.6955±0.0290
0.6686±0.0414
0.6955±0.0290
3
0.9111±0.1034
0.9202±0.0753
0.9328±0.0746
4
1±0
0.9889±0.0026
1±0
5
0.95±0.0499
0.9±0.079
0.95±0.0353
6
0.9771±0.0274
0.9444±0.0526
0.9804±0.0269
Average
0.8906
0.8618
0.8958
VII. ACKNOWLEGEMENTS
This work was supported in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant Nos. 62176033
and 61936001, the Natural Science Foundation of Chongqing
under Grant No. cstc2019jcyj-cxttX0002 and by NICE: NRT
for Integrated Computational Entomology, US NSF award
1631776, the National Key Research and Development Pro-
gram of China under Grant No. 2019QY(Y)0301.
