The Hidden Web, XML and the Semantic Web: 
Scientific Data Management Perspectives 
Fabian M. Suchanek * 
INRIA Saclay 
Paris 
France 
 

Aparna S. Varde 
Dept. of Computer Science, 
Montclair State University 
Montclair, NJ 
USA 

Richi Nayak 
Computer Science 
Discipline, Queensland 
University of Technology 
Brisbane, Australia 

Pierre Senellart * 
Institut Télécom; Télécom 
Paristech; CNRS LTCI 
Paris 
France 

 
ABSTRACT 
The World Wide Web no longer consists just of HTML pages. 
Our work sheds light on a number of trends on the Internet that go 
beyond simple Web pages. The hidden Web provides a wealth of 
data in semi-structured form, accessible through Web forms and 
Web services. These services, as well as numerous other 
applications on the Web, commonly use XML, the eXtensible 
Markup Language. XML has become the lingua franca of the 
Internet that allows customized markups to be defined for specific 
domains. On top of XML, the Semantic Web grows as a common 
structured data source. In this work, we first explain each of these 
developments in detail. Using real-world examples from scientific 
domains of great interest today, we then demonstrate how these 
new developments can assist the managing, harvesting, and 
organization of data on the Web. On the way, we also illustrate 
the current research avenues in these domains. We believe that 
this effort would help bridge multiple database tracks, thereby 
attracting researchers with a view to extend database technology.  
Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.2.8 
[Database 
Management]: 
Database 
Applications 
– 
Scientific databases, H.3.3. [Information Search and Retrieval] – 
Search process 
General Terms 
Design, Human Factors, Performance 
Keywords 
Deep Web, Domain-Specific Markup Languages, Hidden Web, 
Multidisciplinary work, Scientific data, Semantic Web, XML. 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
1.1 Background and Motivation 
The Web has revolutionized the way we seek information. It 
covers domains as diverse as education, entertainment, business, 
and even health. It has evolved into a publishing medium, a global 
information repository and a global electronic market. From a 
user’s perspective, the Internet is mainly a source of Web pages. 
Yet, there is much more to the Web than HTML pages. Much of 
its content lies in databases behind the Web.  This content, called 
the hidden Web, is accessible only through Web forms or through 
specific Web services. It is estimated that the hidden Web 
contains orders of magnitude more data than the visible Web. Yet, 
despite its providing structured data, it is not obvious how to 
access this data by a machine. In order to make use of this wealth 
of information, Web forms have to be found and filled in, and the 
requested answers have to be analyzed and understood.  Through 
the medium of this tutorial, we show the newest research trends in 
the area of the hidden Web and tell the story of various early 
successes. We also focus on the Web developments in two other 
exciting areas, namely XML and the Semantic Web. 
The increasing use of XML is an interesting trend on the Web. 
XML, the Extensible Markup Language, is a W3C standard for 
the exchange of semi-structured data. Through XML, it has 
become possible to transfer data between systems as diverse as 
databases, Web services, semantic knowledge bases or end user 
applications in one common file format. Yet, XML by itself 
defines just the abstract syntax, the hull of the information. It does 
not standardize the semantics or the structure of the data. This is 
the role of domain-specific markup languages (DSMLs). In this 
tutorial, we explain the design principles of DSMLs and how they 
blend into XML. We first give an overview of the most 
established DSMLs, thereby diving into the realm of real-world 
XML as it is used on the Web. We then also show how various 
mining techniques can be applied to XML data for better 
knowledge discovery. 
The latest development on the Web is the Semantic Web – the 
newly growing structure of computer-processable meaningful 
information. With its W3C standards RDF and OWL, the 
Semantic Web aims to unify the way semantic information is 
stored and exchanged, making it possible for one system to not 
just read, but also ―understand‖ the data from another source. Our 
tutorial provides basic literacy with these standards. We also show 
where the Semantic Web has already taken off – with example 
knowledge bases from the science domain, the music domain or 
indeed general common sense knowledge. Still, the Semantic Web 
is in its infancy. Numerous challenging research questions, e.g., in 
areas of information reconciliation and knowledge representation, 
still long to be answered. 
* The work was partially funded by the ERC grant Webdam. 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
EDBT 2011, March 22-24, 2011, Uppsala, Sweden. 
Copyright 2011 ACM 978-1-4503-0528-0/11/0003 ...$10.00. 

 
1.2 Goals 
The overall goal of this tutorial is to show how all these diverse 
trends can be used for data management. As an example, we 
choose the scientific domain. Interdisciplinary research has 
attracted tremendous interest in recent years with the emerging 
need for computer scientists to work across domains. This has led 
to significant development of techniques and standards that use 
computational principles to solve challenging real-world problems 
in specific domains, with new theories being proposed as needed. 
In the last decade, a large part of this research has occurred in the 
field of scientific domains. Management of scientific data has 
accordingly become an exciting interdisciplinary field of study. 
Moreover, in this age of globalization, it is imperative to share the 
information 
with 
communities 
of 
scientists and 
related 
professionals from all over the world through the Web. We 
therefore shed light on new methods of scientific data 
management on the Web. On the way, we illustrate the various 
research questions in these domains that are still unanswered.  
We aim to use various examples from scientific data throughout 
including markup languages specifically developed for scientific 
domains. For instance, we show how data about Cédric Villani 
(recipient of the Fields Medal 2010) and his works can be stored 
and retrieved using each of these technologies. Data on his 
research, not so obvious from the surface Web, can be found 
using intentional and extensional approaches in the hidden Web. 
Meaningful data extraction about him, including personal 
information that requires some human reasoning, can be carried 
out using Semantic Web technologies. XML and its domain-
specific markup languages such as MathML, can store additional 
information, such as mathematical data, in an expressive Web-
based format.  
These technologies are by no means finalized. This tutorial thus 
endeavors to highlight the open issues in these domains and point 
out the hot spots of today’s research. It would thus encourage 
future work across these areas, opening new avenues for research 
and development, especially propelling further research in areas 
that blend these technologies. 
1.3 Outline 
This tutorial is organized in three parts, each one focusing on one 
aspect of scientific data management. The first part delves into the 
hidden Web (also known as the deep Web or invisible Web), 
explaining how it can be used for storing and retrieving scientific 
information. The second part focuses on XML data management 
along with domain-specific markup languages (DSMLs), 
particularly with respect to modeling and mining scientific data. 
The third part presents the details of the Semantic Web with 
emphasis on its usefulness for managing scientific data.  
2. SCIENTIFIC DATA MANAGEMENT 
2.1 The Hidden Web 
It is impossible to reach the whole content of the World Wide 
Web by just following hyperlinks. Rather, some Web pages create 
their content on demand if the user fills out and submits a Web 
form. These forms are typically interfaces to databases stored on 
Web servers, which are usually not directly accessible. A reason 
behind this may be that the Web site owner wants to keep control 
on how the information is accessed. Some hidden Web pages are 
―Yellow pages‖ services and other kinds of directories; others are 
library catalogs, weather forecast services, geo-localization 
services, commercial product catalogs or administrative sources 
such as the database of the United States census bureau. 
As an example in the scientific data management domain, let us 
consider the following task: ―Retrieve all articles published by 
Cédric Villani.‖ This information is most likely available from the 
surface Web, but a classical Web crawler would have to explore a 
large number of documents, and then use some heuristics or 
classification techniques to determine the relevant ones. This is a 
time-consuming and imprecise process. On the other hand, using 
services of the hidden Web, this becomes a very simple task: 
simply use the advanced querying capabilities of a publication 
database, such as Google Scholar. 
The question is how users can benefit from this vast source of 
information. How can they discover it, index it, and be able to use 
it automatically for a given task? We review some ways to tackle 
these challenges. We focus here especially on unsupervised and 
semi-supervised approaches for knowledge discovery over the 
hidden Web such as [11], more adapted to the scale and diversity 
of the Web than supervised methods. Most current approaches can 
be roughly classified [9] into extensional or surfacing strategies 
(retrieving information from the hidden Web and storing it locally 
to process it) and intentional or integration strategies (analyzing 
services to understand their structure, store this description, and 
use it to forward users’ queries to the services). By covering these 
two avenues, we give an overview of the most important current 
approaches of data management on the hidden Web. 
2.2 XML and DSMLs 
With the continuous growth in XML-based data sources, 
especially in scientific applications, the ability to manage 
collections 
of 
XML 
documents 
becomes 
increasingly 
important [7]. In such applications, it is useful to capture the 
reasoning process of domain experts, especially in modeling and 
mining the data. Modeling of XML documents, which are semi-
structured, requires finer details than unstructured (text) 
documents and fully structured documents. XML allows the 
representation of semi-structured and hierarchal data containing 
not only the values of individual items but also the relationships 
between data items. Due to the inherent flexibility of XML, in 
both structure and semantics, mining of XML documents 
significantly differs from structured data mining and text 
mining [6]. Consequently, management of XML data is faced 
with new challenges as well as benefits [10,14].  
A considerable advancement in the general area of XML is the 
advent of domain-specific markup languages (DSMLs). These 
languages are designed such that they follow the syntax of XML 
and encapsulate the semantics of the concerned domain in order to 
cater to the needs of targeted user bodies. Accordingly, they serve 
as communication standards in the respective domains. The 
storage of data in this format has several advantages such as more 
meaningful information retrieval and knowledge discovery. This 
is particularly useful in scientific applications where it is crucial 
to incorporate the domain experts’ perspective in various real-
world situations. 
We discuss the issues in managing XML-based scientific data. We 
address XML modeling and mining, focusing on both structure as 
well as content of XML documents. We give details such as 
vector, tensor, tree and graph structure representation for XML 

 
data, and their usefulness in scientific data management. We cover 
DSMLs with emphasis on scientific domains, giving illustrative 
examples from MML (Medical Markup Language) [5] and 
MathML (Mathematical Markup Language) [3]. We explain the 
steps in DSML development [15], the desired properties of 
DSMLs, and the application of XML constraints to preserve 
semantic restrictions [4].  
Furthermore, we describe how the XML model used for data 
storage facilitates information retrieval with languages in the 
XML family such as XQuery [2]. We also explain the advantages 
of using classical data mining techniques such as association rules 
and clustering over XML documents in conjunction with DSMLs 
to enhance knowledge discovery, especially from scientific data. 
Suitable examples from domains such as medicine are provided 
here [8,15]. Finally, open research questions are addressed 
pertaining to structure and content mining and a greater synergy 
between XML and DSMLs. 
2.3 Semantic Web Technologies 
The Semantic Web project envisions that people will publish 
semantic information in a computer-processable formalism that 
allows the information to be globally interlinked. For this 
purpose, the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) has developed 
the knowledge representation formalisms RDF [18] and OWL 
[17]. These formalisms are based on XML, but go beyond it by 
specifying semantic relationships between entities and even 
logical constraints on them. A collection of world knowledge in 
these formalisms is commonly called an ontology [12]. In this 
tutorial, first give an introduction to semantic knowledge 
representations and ontologies in general. We also explain the 
knowledge representation formalisms RDFS and OWL, their 
syntax and semantics. We explain the vision and the applications 
of the Semantic Web project.  
We then show how the Semantic Web can be used for scientific 
data management. We introduce different existing semantic 
resources for scientific data, from publication databases such as 
DBLP, which have been published in RDF, to general purpose 
ontologies such as YAGO [13] or DBpedia [1], each containing 
thousands of scientists and scientific concepts and theories. 
Several large-scale ontologies are available online and are 
interlinked in the spirit of the Semantic Web. 
We also explain how this information was gathered from different 
sources and how it can be queried using the SPARQL query 
language [19].  
 
3. CHALLENGES 
We highlight some of the challenging issues leading to current 
research questions in each of these Web developments addressed 
in this work. 
In the area of the hidden Web, although there are techniques to 
derive the type of input parameters and output records of a Web 
form, it is still challenging to get the precise semantics of a 
service. If a service, given a person, returns a year, how do we 
know whether this is the birth date, death date, or graduation 
date? Moreover, dealing with complex forms (such as those used 
to access specialized scientific databases), especially when there 
are dependencies between form fields, required and optional 
fields, etc., is a fully open problem by itself. Finally, a knowledge 
discovery system for the hidden Web that would not cover 
specific Web sites or a specific domain of interest but would work 
at the scale of the whole Web is still to be constructed. 
In the area of XML and DSMLs, some of the current issues and 
challenges in managing scientific data are: 
1. Effectively modeling both structure and content features for 
XML documents to adequately represent scientific data and 
investigating how DSMLs can be useful here 
2. Combining structure and content features in different types of 
data models which do not affect the scalability of the mining 
process   
3. Integrating background knowledge of scientific processes in 
XML mining algorithms and harnessing DSMLs here 
4. Developing new standards as needed especially to foster 
knowledge discovery by synergizing XML and DSMLs  
The Semantic Web is still relatively young. Numerous challenges 
still wait to be solved: 
1. One of the main open research questions is the reconciliation 
of 
different 
semantic 
conceptualizations 
in 
different 
ontologies. Techniques such as record linking and matching 
carry over from the database world, but present themselves in 
the new light of the Semantic Web, with more information 
and constraints available to support the mapping process.  
2. Another challenge is the growing of the Semantic Web – be it 
through community work, by converting existing databases 
into RDF, or by Information Extraction. 
3. Reasoning on Web scale is likewise still an open issue. How 
can we apply automated reasoners on huge, potentially noisy 
data sets? 
4. The Semantic Web can also be mined, for example to find 
sub- and super-class relationships or to find schema 
information. 
With the presentation of these challenges, we aim at encouraging 
even more research in the areas of the hidden Web, XML, and the 
Semantic Web, to further enhance scientific data management.  
4. CONCLUSIONS 
This tutorial would show that developments in the areas of the 
hidden Web, Semantic Web, XML and DSMLs have influenced 
the current state of the Web by improving the way different 
computer applications and services communicate, and relevant 
information is identified, especially in scientific domains. 
Most of the data on the Web is so unstructured that only humans 
can understand it. However, the volume of the data is so huge that 
only machines can process it. This paradox highlights the 
importance of techniques ―in between‖ the extremes:  semi- 
structured languages such as XML, the Semantic Web and the 
hidden Web. This tutorial sees itself as an invitation to researchers 
to make use of these technologies on one hand – and to contribute 
to these developments on the other hand. We believe that there is 
exciting research potential in bridging the different new 
developments on the Web. 
5. AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES 
Fabian Suchanek is a postdoctoral researcher at INRIA Saclay in 
Paris. He spent one year as a visiting researcher at Microsoft 
Research Silicon Valley. Fabian obtained his doctoral degree at 
the Max Planck Institute for Informatics/Germany in 2008. In his 

 
dissertation, Fabian developed methods for the automatic 
construction and maintenance of a large knowledge base, YAGO. 
For his thesis, he received the ACM SIGMOD Dissertation Award 
Honorable Mention. The original YAGO paper at the WWW 
Conference in 2007 has received more than 350 citations, and 
YAGO is used in many major knowledge-base projects around the 
world (including DBpedia). 
Aparna Varde is a Tenure Track Assistant Professor in Computer 
Science at Montclair State University, NJ. She obtained her Ph.D. 
in the area of scientific data mining from Worcester Polytechnic 
Institute, MA. For her work, she was given an Associate 
membership of Sigma Xi, the Scientific Research Society for 
excellence in multidisciplinary research. Her research interests 
span data mining, databases and artificial intelligence with 
particular emphasis on scientific domains. This has lead to over 
35 publications in these areas. She has served on the PC of 
various conferences, e.g., ER 2010, EDBT 2009, ICDM 2008 and 
been a reviewer for journals including TDKE, DKE and the 
VLDB journal. She is advising a Ph.D. student and has been the 
research advisor for 4 M.S. students and 5 B.S. students. She is 
supported through various grants by organizations such as the 
National Science Foundation, USA. 
Richi Nayak is a senior lecturer in Computer Science discipline at 
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia. Her 
research interests are data mining and knowledge discovery. In 
recent years she has focused her research on Web intelligence, 
Web service discovery and XML data management. She has been 
successful in applying theories of data mining in a variety of 
practical scientific settings. Her publications include 1 edited 
workshop proceeding, 1 edited book, 8 book chapters, 15 refereed 
journal articles and 60 refereed conference articles. She is founder 
and chief editor of the International Journal of Knowledge and 
Web Intelligence.  
Pierre Senellart is an Associate Professor in the Computer 
Science and Networking department at Télécom ParisTech, the 
French leading engineering school specialized in information 
technology. He is an alumnus of the École normale supérieure and 
obtained his Ph.D. (2007) in Computer Science from Université 
Paris-Sud, studying under the supervision of Serge Abiteboul. He 
has published research in top-tier computer science conference 
and journals and has served on the PC and as an officer of various 
conferences; he is also the Information Director of the Journal of 
the ACM. His research interests focus around theoretical aspects 
of database management systems and the World Wide Web, and 
more specifically on the intentional indexing of the hidden Web, 
probabilistic XML databases, and graph mining. 
6. REFERENCES 
[1] Auer, S., Bizer, C., Kobilarov, G., Lehmann, J., Cyganiak, 
R., Ives, Z.G.: DBpedia: A nucleus for a web of open data. 
In: Aberer, K., Choi, K.-S., Noy, N., Allemang, D., Lee, K.-
I., Nixon, L., Golbeck, J., Mika, P., Maynard, D., Mizoguchi, 
R., Schreiber, G., Cudré-Mauroux, P. (eds.) ASWC 2007 and 
ISWC 2007. LNCS, vol. 4825, pp. 722–735.Springer, 
Heidelberg (2007) 
[2] Boag, S., Fernandez, M., Florescu, D., Robie, J., Simeon, J.: 
XQuery 1.0: An XML Query Language. W3C Working Draft 
(November 2003).  
[3] Carlisle, D., Ion, P., Miner, R., Poppelier, N.: Mathematical 
Markup Language (MathML). World Wide Web Consortium 
(2001). 
[4]  Davidson, S., Fan, W., Hara, C., Qin, J.: Propagating XML 
Constraints to Relations. In: International Conference on 
Data Engineering (March 2003) 
[5] Guo, J., Araki, K., Tanaka, K., Sato, J., Suzuki, M., Takada, 
A., Suzuki, T., Nakashima, Y., Yoshihara, H.: The Latest 
MML (Medical Markup Language) —XML based Standard 
for Medical Data Exchange / Storage. In: Journal of Medical 
Systems 27(4), 357–366 (2003) 
[6] Kutty, S., Nayak, R.: Frequent Pattern Mining on XML 
documents. In: Song, M., Wu, Y.-F. (eds.),  Handbook of 
Research on Text and Web Mining Technologies, pp. 227–
248. Idea Group Inc., USA (2008) 
[7] Li, H., Shan, F., Lee, S.Y.: Online mining of frequent query 
trees over XML data streams. In: 15th international 
conference on World Wide Web, Edinburgh, Scotland, pp. 
959–960. ACM Press, New York (2008) 
[8] Nayak, R.: Fast and Effective Clustering of XML Data 
Utilizing their Structural Information. Knowledge and 
Information Systems (KAIS) 14(2), 197–215 (2008) 
[9] Ru, Y., Horowitz, E.: Indexing the invisible Web: A Survey. 
Online Information Review, 29(3):249--265, 2009. 
[10] Rusu, L.I., Rahayu, W., Taniar, D.: Mining Association 
Rules from XML Documents. In: Vakali, A., Pallis, G. (eds.) 
Web Data Management Practices (2007) 
[11] Senellart, P., Mittal, A., Muschick, D., Gilleron, R.: and 
Tommasi, M., Automatic Wrapper Induction from Hidden-
Web Sources with Domain Knowledge. In: WIDM, Napa, 
USA, pp. 9–16 (October 2008) 
[12] Staab, S., Studer, R. (eds.): Handbook on Ontologies, 2nd 
edn. Springer, Heidelberg (2008) 
[13] Suchanek, F.M., Kasneci, G., Weikum, G.: YAGO: A Core 
of Semantic Knowledge. In: WWW (2007) 
[14] Wan, J.: Mining Association rules from XML data mining 
query. Research and practice in Information Technology 32, 
169–174 (2004) 
[15] Varde, A., Rundensteiner, E., Fahrenholz, S.: XML Based 
Markup Languages for Specific Domains. In: Web Based 
Support Systems. Springer-Verlag, UK, pp. 215-238 (2010). 
[16] Varde A., Suchanek, F, Nayak, R. and Senellart, P.: 
Knowledge Discovery over Deep Web, Semantic Web and 
XML In: DAFSAA, Brisbane, Australia, pp. 784-788 (April 
2009) 
[17] World Wide Web Consortium. OWL Web Ontology 
Language (W3C Recommendation 2004-02-10), 
http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-features/ 
[18] World Wide Web Consortium. RDF Primer, W3C 
Recommendation, 2004, http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-primer/  
[19] World Wide Web Consortium. SPARQL Query Language 
for RDF, W3C Recommendation, 2008, 
http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-sparql-query/
