ManyOpt: An Extensible Tool for Mixed, Non-Linear
Optimization Through SMT Solving
Andrea Callia D’Iddio and Michael Huth
Department of Computing, Imperial College London
London, SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom

Abstract
Optimization of Mixed-Integer Non-Linear Programming (MINLP) supports impor-
tant decisions in applications such as Chemical Process Engineering. But current solvers
have limited ability for deductive reasoning or the use of domain-speciﬁc theories, and
the management of integrality constraints does not yet exploit automated reasoning
tools such as SMT solvers. This seems to limit both scalability and reach of such tools
in practice. We therefore present a tool, ManyOpt, for MINLP optimization that en-
ables experimentation with reduction techniques which transform a MINLP problem
to feasibility checking realized by an SMT solver. ManyOpt is similar to the SAT solver
ManySAT in that it runs a speciﬁed number of such reduction techniques in parallel to
get the strongest result on a given MINLP problem. The tool is implemented in layers,
which we may see as features and where reduction techniques are feature vectors. Some
of these features are inspired by known MINLP techniques whereas others are novel
and speciﬁc to SMT. Our experimental results on standard benchmarks demonstrate
the beneﬁts of this approach. The tool supports a variety of SMT solvers and is easily
extensible with new features, courtesy of its layered structure. For example, logical
formulas for deductive reasoning are easily added to constrain further the optimization
of a MINLP problem of interest.
1
Introduction
MINLP problems are like the familiar linear programming models, except that constraints
or the objective function may contain non-linear terms, and that some variables may not
have real-valued type but an integral or even binary one. The underlying decision problem
is undecidable in general. But solving MINLP problems is crucial in many areas of applica-
tion, such as Chemical Process Engineering. Current mathematical tools for solving MINLP
problems, for example ANTIGONE [34], made important progress in solving problems that
occur in practice. But they presently do not support deductive reasoning and incremental
solving – which could generate explanatory scenarios and support “what-if” questions. They
also don’t yet exploit the powerful reasoning techniques of SMT solvers in the transformation
of MINLP problems into problem types that oﬀer computational advantages – such as NLP
whose problems have no integrality constraints.
State-of-the-art SMT solvers do support deductive reasoning and incremental solving, but
they usually have little support for non-linear arithmetics and arithmetics that combine real
and integer types, as is the case in MINLP problems. This motivated us to write a tool, called
1
arXiv:1702.01332v1  [cs.AI]  4 Feb 2017

ManyOpt, whose purpose is to be an extensible workbench for exploring and evaluating how
MINLP problems can be reduced to instances of SMT solving. The tool therefore inherits
the ability of incremental solving and deductive reasoning from SMT solvers.
The default mode of our tool executes in parallel diﬀerent reduction techniques from
MINLP to instances of SMT solving. This parallelization means that these techniques com-
pete on a given input and so may speed up solving since the “winner” will terminate opti-
mization. Reduction techniques themselves are conceptualized as feature vectors, and so are
a composition of features that may coordinate or complement diﬀerent reduction activities.
Our tool can therefore be extended with new features and new feature vectors to get richer
parallelized solvers for MINLP problems. The tool makes the assumption that optimal values
are only computed up to some speciﬁed accuracy, a further input parameter to the tool.
Reduction techniques need to deal with computational problems related to the manage-
ment of integrality constraints and to the non-linearity of terms. The tool ManyOpt deals
with such integrality management by using the parallel combination of dynamic branch and
bound techniques and a novel static binarized ﬂattening technique. The experiments reported
in this paper demonstrate that the combination of such techniques is instrumental in solving
many MINLP benchmarks that would otherwise not be solvable within reasonable running
times by branch and bound techniques that reduce to SMT problem instances.
The non-linearity of terms is dealt with by the parallel combination of a naive search
technique, which has shown to often work well with satisﬁability solving (see MiniSAT+
[18]), with an unbounded binary search technique, which is faster in scanning intervals con-
taining many feasible objective values. Our tool also supports the combination of these two
techniques into a hybrid approach whose cooperative strategy conjoins the invariants of both
techniques. Our experiments provide evidence that the approach we advocate and develop
here has deﬁnite potential in crafting MINLP solvers based on SMT.
Contributions of our paper:
We oﬀer a tool with which researchers can explore tech-
niques for reducing MINLP optimization problems to instances of SMT, where optimization
is computed up to some speciﬁable accuracy. We organize the design space for such reduc-
tion techniques such that points in that space are feature vectors, where features are choices
within a particular reduction layer of that tool. These layers are easily extensible with new
features and the tool supports, in principal, the use of any SMTLIB 2.0 compliant SMT
solver. The presently implemented features of ManyOpt represent some techniques already
familiar in the optimization community but also novel techniques that are made possible by
using an SMT solver as a feasibility checker. We evaluate this tool through standard MINLP
benchmarks. In particular, we show that our tool can solve some benchmarks from Chemical
Process Engineering that are widely held to be challenging for existing MINLP solvers: our
tool solves all these problems and with higher accuracy than that reported in some existing
MINLP tools. We also evaluate ManyOpt on 193 benchmarks from the MINLPLIB library,
138 NLP problems and 56 MINLP problems. Our tool solved 68% of the MINLP problems
and 63% of the NLP problems within 30 minutes. This appears to be the strongest evidence
yet of the potential of SMT solving for MINLP problems. The analysis of these experiments
also clearly reveals the beneﬁts of running diﬀerent reduction techniques in parallel. For ex-
ample, using just one reduction technique for dealing with non-linearity would dramatically
reduce the percentage of solved benchmarks and increase the computing time for solving.
2

Outline of paper
In Section 2 we recall some background on MINLP problem types
and SMT. The tool architecture and functionality of ManyOpt is the topic of Section 3. A
description of the algorithms and supported features is given in Section 4. In Section 5 we
evaluate our approach and tool experimentally. Related work is discussed in Section 6 and
the paper concludes in Section 7.
2
Background
Mixed Integer Non-linear optimization.
A Mixed Integer Non-Linear Programming
(MINLP) problem is a mixed integer optimization problem where the objective function,
some constraints or both may be non-linear [19].
This leads to established subtypes of
MINLP: In LP and NLP problems, there are no integrality constraints. In LP, the objective
function and the constraints are linear, in NLP problems they can also be non-linear. ILP
and INLP problems are variants of LP and NLP, respectively, in which all variables must
have integer values. MILP is a subtype of MINLP in which constraints and objective function
are linear. BLP, BNLP, MBLP and MBNLP correspond to ILP, INLP, MILP, and MINLP,
respectively, but integrality constraints are replaced by “binarity” constraints: all variables
from the designated set must have binary instead of integral values.
Complexity analysis.
Unfortunately, the problem of solving a generic MINLP problem
to deterministic global optimality is undecidable [25], due to a combination of non-linearity
and integrality. Notwithstanding, several eﬀorts have been made to solve MINLP problems,
supported by decomposition or transformation techniques speciﬁc to subclasses of MINLP:
Solving a generic NLP problem has been proven to be NP-hard [36], but many eﬀective
methods and algorithms have been developed in the last four decades (see [3] for a survey).
Solving a generic ILP or MILP problem is also NP-hard [13, 26], but again much progress
has been done to develop eﬀective techniques (see [13] for example).
Optimization based on SMT. Satisﬁability Modulo Theories (SMT) solvers [16] are an
extension of SAT solvers, where additional theories can be used to express logical formulae
and to ﬁnd a satisfying assignment. The SMT solvers contain speciﬁc algorithms based on
many diﬀerent theories (see e.g. [29]), including: theory of equality, bitvectors, reals, integers,
and arrays. An important and popular SMT solver among the ones supported directly in our
tool is Z3 [15]. Z3 is an eﬃcient incremental SMT solver that supports exact arithmetic [8],
which is fundamental whenever exact solutions or high conﬁdence in approximate solutions
is required.
The theories modeled in SMT and the related languages provide support to naturally
encode the variables and the constraints of an optimization problem, thus SMT solvers can
be used as a black box in order to act as a feasibility solver for optimization algorithms.
In [7] the Z3 solver has been extended in order to also perform optimization. The resulting
solver, called νZ, can be used to combine optimization with the powerful capabilities of Z3.
The νZ solver has shown the ability to eﬃciently solve many MILP optimization problems
and it competes well with other SMT-based optimizers presented in [40] and [31] in this area.
But νZ supports only linear mixed arithmetic, thus it has very little support for MINLP
problems as such. The main purpose of our research is to add such capability in the context
of SMT-based optimization.
3

3
Tool Architecture and Functionality
Figure 1 shows the main structure of our tool ManyOpt, represented as a data ﬂow diagram.
As input it takes a desired accuracy for the computed global optimum and, either an OSiL
model for a MINLP problem or an MPS model for a MILP problem which is translated
into OSiL. Then ManyOpt executes in parallel a set of dataﬂows on that OSiL input, where
each dataﬂow has its own feature vector of how to realize conﬁgurable tool layers. The tool
layers are Preprocessing, Integrality Management, Continuous Relaxation Optimization, and
Feasibility Checking. Each of these layers contains within it an (extensible) list of features, as
seen in Fig. 1. The default setting uses 18 feature vectors run as parallel processes and keeps
track of dependencies within each such vector. For example, if feature BinarizedFlattening is
enabled in Preprocessing, then feature Disabled has to be chosen for Integrality Management.
For each feature vector, the data ﬂow of its process is as follows. First, an SMTLIB 2.0
representation of the model is constructed, based on the input and selected features. After
that, a Preprocessing phase may transform the SMTLIB 2.0 representation using either Bi-
narization or our novel Binarized Flattening techniques to convert the MINLP problem into
a MBNLP problem, where all integer variables can only have values 0 or 1.
Second, the Main Optimization Process uses the lower three layers, organized as a stack,
to ﬁnd an optimal solution for the given model within the speciﬁed accuracy. The Integrality
Management layer may apply branch-and-bound techniques such as One-By-One or our novel
All-In-One to handle integrality constraints. This layer produces NLP problems as continuous
relaxations of the original MINLP problem, and then relies on the Continuous Relaxation
Optimization layer to solve them. Alternatively, Integrality Management may be disabled,
for example if the original problem is already an NLP problem, or if we wish to move the
complexity of integrality management to lower layers.
The Continuous Relaxation Optimization layer takes an NLP problem as input and re-
duces optimization to the repeated use of the Feasibility Checking layer. A number of such
reduction algorithms are supported: the naive method (the term “naive” is used without
prejudice and inspired by work on pseudo-boolean optimization [18]), the unbounded binary
search method, and a novel method of us based on a hybrid combination of these two methods.
The feasibility of an NLP problem, represented in SMTLIB 2.0 in our tool, is veriﬁed
using an SMT solver. Currently, ManyOpt supports in the feasibility layer in Figure 1, the
solver Z3 [15] directly, the solvers MathSAT [10], CVC4 [2] and YICES [17] through the PySMT
library [23]; other SMT solvers compatible with SMTLIB 2.0 may be used through a POSIX
piping.
4
Tool description: algorithms and software design
4.1
Input parsing: OSiL and MPS
Our ManyOpt tool supports two input formats for optimization models. The OSiL format
[20] has been deﬁned and published by COIN-OR within their Optimization Services project
[37]. It is a widely adopted XML representation (e.g. in [11]) of an optimization problem,
and its schema is available in [38].
4

Figure 1: The architecture and approach of our tool ManyOpt
5

The OSiL language distinguishes among linear constraints, quadratic constraints and
generic non-linear constraints. Linear constraints are represented using a compact coeﬃcient
matrix, and quadratic constraints are represented by a tuple list. Non-linear constraints are
represented by using trees, where each node represents an operator and its children represent
the operands.
Using an XML representation for MINLP problems has several beneﬁts in terms of robust-
ness, stability and standardizability. In particular, using an XML schema facilitates checking
for errors in an OSiL model without the need to write code for this purpose. Given an OSiL
model as input, ManyOpt constructs several alternative SMTLIB 2.0 representations of it,
whose construction is based on the conﬁguration values in each feature vector corresponding
to a speciﬁc parallel execution.
Our tool also supports Mixed Integer Linear Programming models (MILP) represented
in MPS format, which is another well-known format for optimization (see e.g. [28]), still
consisting of a compact coeﬃcient matrix representing linear constraints. We added this
support by writing a simple C++ code entirely based on the conversion libraries provided by
COIN-OR, in order to convert the MPS input into OSiL format.
Our tool OSiL parser can detect whether the problem is MINLP or just NLP, and in the
second case it can enable in ManyOpt only those feature vectors that are useful for NLP, thus
saving system resources and improving performance.
4.2
Pre-processing: binarization and ﬂattening
Binarization Binarization mechanisms are widely used for mixed optimization, in order to
handle integrality constraints where variables can only have values 0 or 1 (see [19] Subsection
6.2.1), thus transforming the MINLP problem into an MBNLP problem. In order to achieve
this, each variable involved in an integrality constraint is represented by creating a set of
variables representing the “bits” of the original variable, which is assumed to be bounded in
order to determine the amount of “bits” needed. Then 0 and 1 are set as lower and upper
bounds for these new variables, and they are constrained to be integer, i.e. either 0 or 1.
Formally, an integrality constraint x ∈Z for variable x bounded by l ≤x ≤u is
represented by q many variables b1, . . . , bq with q = 1 + ⌈log2(u −l)⌉, equality constraint
x = l + b1 + 2b2 + 4b3 + · · · + 2q−1bq and inequalities 0 ≤bi ≤1 for all i such that 1 ≤i ≤q
added to the optimization problem. Now, the integrality constraints bi ∈Z can replace the
original x ∈Z integrality constraint.
Binarized Flattening
An alternative to branch and bound consists in ﬂattening the in-
tegrality constraints during the pre-processing stage, and moving the complexity to the logic
manipulation abilities provided by the SMT solvers by using the OR operator. More pre-
cisely, this method can be imagined as a sort of “extreme” version of branch and bound, which
tries to prevent all the integrality violations by adding speciﬁc constraints before starting the
actual solving of the optimization problem. After that, a simple optimization without any
branch and bound method can be started, thus the Integrality Management layer can be set to
“Disabled”. This approach also assumes that the variables involved in integrality constraints
are bounded.
6

Formally, for each integrality constraint x ∈Z where x is bounded by l ≤x ≤u we add
the assertion
(x ≥l) ∧
^
l≤i≤u
(x ≤i ∨x ≥i + 1) ∧(x ≤u)
(1)
If this approach is applied as it is, then it would be dramatically ineﬃcient. In particular,
for each variable x involved in integrality constraints, it generates an assertion containing
size(x) + 1 disjunctions where size(x) is u −l, where u and l still represent the upper
and the lower bound for x. This means that if the lower bound of x is −10000 and the
upper bound is +10000 (realistic numbers for many problems), this adds an assertion with
20001 disjunctions. For hundreds of such integrality constraints, the size of the resulting new
feasibility problem would be hard to manage.
But, if this approach is combined with binarization, then each variable involved in inte-
grality constraints would be bounded just by 0 and 1, then only one disjunction is needed to
exclude all the non-integer values between 0 and 1. In particular, if b ∈Z is an integrality
constraint in a binarized problem, then adding the assertion
(b = 0) ∨(b = 1)
(2)
is suﬃcient to “ﬂatten” it. One may wonder whether the fact that such a simple assertion can
be added to ﬂatten a binarized program is counter-balanced by the fact that many variables
may be needed to represent the original variables as sequences of bits.
For the above example, binarization needs only ⌈log2(20001)⌉= 18 “binary” variables to
represent it with size(x) = 20001. Since just one disjunction is used to ﬂatten each “binary”
variable, only 18 disjunctions need to be added instead of 20001 if ﬂattening is applied to
the binary representation of x.
To the best of our knowledge, binarized ﬂattening is a novel approach and the experimen-
tal results in Section 5 clearly show that it has been the most valuable method implemented
in the ManyOpt tool, as it has been fundamental to eﬃciently solve many problems which
have not been solved within given timeouts by the methods based on branch and bound.
4.3
Integrality management: one-by-one vs all-in-one
Most of the methods we implemented for integrality management are based on branch and
bound techniques, but here we also move part of the combinatorial complexity to the lower
layers.
The one-by-one approach
This approach is similar to a standard branch and bound
approach. But there is an important diﬀerence: assume that a feasible solution is found in
which at least one integrality constraint is violated. Then choose one variable x whose value
v violates one of the integrality constraints and add the assertion x ≤⌊v⌋∨x ≥⌈v⌉to the
optimization problem. Since disjunctions are supported in SMT as assertions, this is well
deﬁned and avoids a split into two optimization problems by delegating such combinatorial
complexity to the SAT engine of the SMT solver.
The all-in-one approach We call the above approach one-by-one, as each iteration only
adds a sole assertion about a sole variable. But SMT solvers allow us to add more than
one constraint at a time, leading to the all-in-one approach; it collects all variables whose
7

values violate integrality constraints in a feasible solution and adds the above disjunction as
an assertion but for all such variables simultaneously.
Delegating to lower layers As explained in section 3, it is also possible to disable integral-
ity management. In this case, the whole complexity due to integrality constraints is moved
directly to lower levels. Considering the current components of the optimization stack in
ManyOpt, this would mean that such complexity is moved to the Feasibility Checking layer,
where SMT solvers can provide support since the variables involved in integrality constraints
can be represented using integer variables directly in SMT, and theories for mixed integer
arithmetic are used by the SMT solver when it is called for feasibility checking.
4.4
Continuous relaxation optimization
As explained in section 3, this layer provides algorithms to solve NLP problems, and it relies
on the feasibility checking layer.
The naive approach This method is quite simple but it can be eﬀective in many circum-
stances, and it has been used for optimization. It consists of a loop in which a value is found
for the objective function using the feasibility checker, and an attempt to ﬁnd a lower value
is made by adding an assertion saying that the objective function must be smaller than that
value. When the problem will become infeasible, then the last found objective value, if there
is one, is the optimal solution. See [18] for a more detailed description of this method.
Unbounded binary search We use here unbounded binary search as developed and used
in [4] for optimization using an SMT solver. The unbounded binary search is composed of
two main phases.
1. The bounds search, in which initial lower and upper bounds are found such that the
optimal value of the objective is between such bounds.
2. The bisection phase, which is the actual binary search, where the interval between the
lower bound and the upper bound is restricted by splitting it in two equal parts, until
the optimal value of the objective is found, relative to the speciﬁed accuracy.
For more details about this method, see [4].
Hybrid method Our novel Hybrid method exploits the fact that Naive and Unbounded
Binary Search methods can be written such that they have a similar structure and they share
the same invariants. It is still composed of two phases like unbounded binary search, where
ﬁrst upper and lower bounds are determined for the objective, then the interval is restricted
to ﬁnd the optimal value. But in each phase, “naive steps” are used to determine whether an
interval is empty in order to stop the algorithm if the current solution is already the optimal
one.
Intuitively, the performance of this method on a speciﬁc NLP problem is expected to be
closer to the performance of the best method (naive or unbounded binary search) on the
same problem. This is conﬁrmed by almost all the experiments in Section 5.
8

4.5
Feasibility checking: SMT solving
Originally, the ManyOpt tool was relying exclusively on Z3 as a feasibility checker, since
Z3 provides a well-documented Python API which has been used by our algorithms. But
later, thanks to the PySMT framework [23], we have refactored the project and we made it
independent of the underlying SMT solver, by creating a Feasibility Checking layer in which
several solvers are available. More precisely, by using PySMT we now also support the SMT
solvers MathSAT [10], CVC4 [2] and YICES [17].
Among the above-mentioned solvers, Z3 is still the only one which has a relevant support
for non-linear arithmetics, especially the non-mixed one, i.e. with real arithmetics only. The
other solvers provide a good support for linear arithmetics and can be used for MILP prob-
lems. Besides, they implicitly provide some support for MINLP problems where non-linearity
is due to particular combinations of linear functions, e.g. absolute values.
But, courtesy to the PySMT library, the ManyOpt tool also supports any external SMTLIB
2.0 compliant solver through POSIX piping by just providing the solver executable ﬁle.
Therefore, ManyOpt can be used with SMT solvers speciﬁcally designed to reason about non-
linear real arithmetics, like [9], [21], [22]. Such solvers have not been tested yet, but it will
be interesting to use them in future work as feasibility checker with a parallel combination
of our techniques for Integrality Management and Continuous Relaxation Optimization.
5
Experimental results and validation
Here we discuss the salient experimental results which have been obtained using the ManyOpt
tool.
The main source of benchmarks for our experiments is MINLPLIB 2.0 [11], which
contains a collection of more than one thousand MINLP and NLP problems in many formats,
including the OSiL format we are able to parse in our tool. We also tested some MILP
benchmarks available in MPS format from the MIPLIB2010 portal [28], and we also ran the
tool ManyOpt with some complex NLP benchmarks from the Chemical Engineering world.
All the ﬁndings are reported below.
5.1
Overall evaluation for ManyOpt
We started the experimentation with ManyOpt by taking the benchmarks from MINLPLIB
and by starting to run all of them sorted by the benchmark size (smallest ﬁrst), in order to
be able to start with a reasonable timeout (30 minutes) for ManyOpt to get the solutions.
The experimentation is still in progress, and if needed we will also increase the timeout as
the benchmarks will increase in size and complexity. In this case, the “size” of a benchmark
has been chosen to be the OSiL ﬁle size, in order to consider at the same time the number
of variables, the number of constraints and the complexity of constraints.
So far we have ran all the ﬁrst 193 experiments in the MINLPLIB archive sorted by size,
not including the ones which have been ﬁltered out because they were containing transcen-
dental functions. The exponential functions are the only non-polynomial functions accepted
by our tool, but usually they are not solved because the SMT solving tools have almost no
support for exponential functions. But we included them in the experimentation.
9

The machine used for the experiments is a 12-core Intel R⃝Xeon R⃝E5-2640 2.50 GHz CPU
with 47GB of RAM memory. Of the 193 MINLPLIB experiments ran so far, 56 were MINLP
and 138 were NLP. For a fair analysis, we split up the experimental session into two sepa-
rate ones in order to avoid running one category more than the other one (e.g. NLP more
than MINLP). All the complete logs from the experiments are available in the ManyOpt tool
webpage [33], , where for each experiment many details are logged depending on the chosen
features, e.g. the bisection time for unbounded binary search, or the number of branch and
bound iterations.
For the 193 experiments we ran, excluding only one MINLPLIB benchmark, the ManyOpt
always returned the right solution when not exceeding the timeout. Clearly, the solution
provided by ManyOpt was right with respect to the given accuracy, which has been set to
0.001.
We ran our experiments using 18 feature vectors in parallel for MINLP processes, by
choosing all the possible methods in each layer, except for the feasibility layer, where we just
chose Z3 because it can support non-linear arithmetic.
For the NLP problems, preprocessing and integrality management features are not appli-
cable because there are no integrality constraints. Thus, ManyOpt runs only 3 feature vectors
in parallel for those problems.
As said above, the logs produced by the experiments are all available in the ManyOpt tool
webpage [33]. Below we summarize the most important facts conveyed by the experimenta-
tion.
• Regarding MINLP problems, our tool found the right solution within the given timeout,
in about 68% of the problems.
• Our tool solved about 63% of the NLP problems within the given timeout.
These are very high percentages, since the underlying Z3 solver used for the experimen-
tation has low support for non-linear and mixed arithmetic. Plus the percentage is surely
higher if we also ﬁltered out some problems containing exponential expressions; we will soon
ﬁnd a way to automatically ﬁlter them out and the updated results will be shown on the tool
website.
Observation Compared to the current literature, this is an important step forward in sup-
porting non-linear and mixed constraints in SMT-based optimization. The complementarity
of our methods was crucial to obtain this; we analyze these methods experimentally layer by
layer as discussed below.
We also tried to solve some complex and widely believed to be challenging problems from
Chemical Engineering, still with a 30 minutes timeout, and we solved 4 diﬀerent problems
in [14, 6, 24]. In particular, [14] reports that a popular non-linear solver like MINOS [35]
provided a poor solution for the example 2 in that paper, while our tool found the right
solution within the timeout.
10

benchmark
allinone
onebyone
nobb
bin allinone
bin onebyone
bin ﬂattening
hmittelman
1.08
nvs04
0.38
0.46
■
nvs06
0.81
0.39
■
1.08
nvs07
0.21
5.59
■
12.22
0.19
nvs10
0.23
149.79
0.06
nvs16
0.27
0.27
■
gear
0.28
0.33
■
2.11
4.45
112.07
prob02
■
15.54
prob03
■
0.02
st miqp3
0.03
nvs15
2.85
■
0.03
st testph4
■
0.06
st miqp2
0.24
0.49
■
15.28
st miqp1
■
0.05
st test1
0.17
■
3.11
0.03
st test2
16.38
ex1221
0.48
1.17
0.65
2.45
0.19
fac1
43.58
120.12
■
14.70
st e13
14.09
14.11
■
22.12
41.21
0.02
sporttournament06
■
4.75
gbd
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.04
0.04
0.02
st e27
0.16
alan
0.11
0.23
0.14
0.55
0.09
nvs01
1.55
2.55
■
gear4
■
19.12
91.31
15.92
tln2
10.32
■
0.90
16.64
0.07
ex1263a
■
1.16
Figure 2: Some experimental data about preprocessing and integrality management methods:
numbers show running times in seconds, white squares mean a timeout and in column nobb
black squares refer to an UNKNOWN result of an SMT instance
5.2
Layer analysis: preprocessing and integrality management
After analyzing the overall experimental results for ManyOpt, here we show some experimental
data in which single feature vectors have been ran instead of the whole ManyOpt tool, in
order to show the performances of each feature in the ManyOpt layers.
Because of time
constraints, since such single feature vectors have been executed one by one sequentially, for
these experiments the timeout has been reduced to 150 seconds (otherwise, since 18 feature
vectors have been tested, each single experiment could have taken up to 9 hours).
For some representative benchmarks, Figure 2 compares the performance of all the meth-
ods from the Preprocessing and Integrality Management layers, since both layers manipulate
integrality constraints. Each column represents a combination of methods for these two lay-
ers. More precisely, the columns show non-binarized all-in-one and one-by-one methods, the
disabled integrality management (represented with nobb, i.e. no branch and bound), which
just delegates the integrality management to the SMT solver, the binarized all-in-one and
one-by-one methods and ﬁnally the binarized ﬂattening method. For each combination, the
best result obtained when combining it with the three methods for continuous relaxation
optimization is reported.
The little white squares in the paper represent a case in which the corresponding combina-
tion of features did not manage to ﬁnd the solution within the timeout. In the nobb column
(i.e. disabled integrality management), a black square means that the SMT solver returned
UNKNOWN because of some incomplete theory related to mixed and non-linear arithmetic.
The benchmarks reported here have been chosen to show behaviors which occur in general
11

in the experiments made so far, and the main observations to make based on these results
are the following:
The ﬁrst thing to observe is the importance of the binarized ﬂattening method. The
ﬁgure shows many cases (see e.g. hmittelman, prob02, prob03, st testph4, and others) in
which binarized ﬂattening has been the only method which managed to obtain the optimum
eﬃciently, while all the other ones exceeded the timeout. Binarized ﬂattening has been a
crucial method in order to solve most of the problems even if Z3 has low support for non-linear
and mixed arithmetic.
Looking at the table, we notice that the non-binarized all-in-one approach also has an
important role in solving. In many cases, it performs better than binarized ﬂattening, or it
solves the problem while binarized ﬂattening exceeds the timeout. Together with binarized
ﬂattening, the non-binarized all-in-one mode is fundamental for ﬁnding the solution for an
important fraction of the MINLP problems tested so far. The complementarity relationship
between these two approaches is clear (one is binarized, the other one is non-binarized, one
applies branch and bound dynamically, the other one statically ﬂattens all the integrality
conditions a priori, etc.), and their parallel execution lets us get the beneﬁts from both of
them, depending on the type of optimization problem which must be solved.
The other features shown in the table can also win occasionally. For example, the nobb
approach, which moves integrality management towards SMT solving, has been the only
method which found a solution for the st miqp3 benchmark. And there are other cases in
which the one-by-one approach may perform better than all-in-one (see nvs06) and cases
in which binarized branch and bound performs better than the non-binarized one (see tln2,
where the binarized all-in-one approach solves the problem in 0.9 seconds and the non-
binarized all-in-one approach exceeds the timeout).
Observation Our experimental results for ManyOpt show clear beneﬁts of its approach, as
seen in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. If we had delegated mixed arithmetics to the SMT solver, e.g., then
we would have solved almost no MINLP problems instead of 68% as there is limited support
for the combination of mixed and non-linear arithmetics by SMT solvers. This is also clear
from the many black squares (i.e. SMT solver returning UNKNOWN) in the nobb column in
the table, where the mixed non-linear complexity handling is delegated to the SMT solving.
5.3
Layer by layer analysis: continuous relaxation optimization
Figure 3 shows the performance of the three features available in the Continuous Relaxation
Optimization layer, namely the unbounded binary search (U.B.S column), the naive method
and our hybrid method.
Since the Continuous Relaxation Optimization features can also be used in NLP problems,
here we show the results of some tests with NLP benchmarks, where the timeout is 10 minutes
and only three features vectors have been tested for each benchmark.
The benchmarks in this table have been chosen to show two important facts: the ﬁrst
one is the complementarity between the Unbounded Binary Search and the Naive method.
In particular, while the naive search technique, has been shown to often work well with
SAT-based optimization (see MiniSAT+), the unbounded binary search technique is faster
in scanning big intervals containing many valid objective values. The table shows how big
the gaps between the two techniques can be. For example, one of the two methods takes
12

benchmark
U.B.S
Naive
Hybrid
st e19
0.19
1.02
0.34
chance
0.26
1.63
0.53
linear
8.24
4.67
4.91
circle
3.47
4.92
4.82
pointpack02
0.19
206.98
0.47
house
1.03
2.04
haverly
0.61
1.24
wastewater02m1
308.82
dispatch
38.66
st e22
0.15
1.48
0.27
sambal
219.34
527.86
immun
24.17
47.19
Figure 3: Typical experimental data for three continuous relaxation optimization methods
within ManyOpt on selected benchmarks: running times are shown in seconds and their
absence indicates a 10 minute timeout
just a few seconds, while the other one even exceeds the 10 minutes timeout (see the house,
haverly, wastewater02m1 and dispatch benchmarks for example).
The second important fact shown in the table is the beneﬁt of the hybrid feature in
mitigating the gap between unbounded binary search and naive search, as the hybrid feature
combines them by exploiting the common invariants of their algorithms. As the table shows,
its performance is almost always (but with some exceptions) closer to the best feature between
U.B.S and Naive, and according to the overall experiments for ManyOpt it also wins very often
(in about 20% of cases, see the logs in the ManyOpt tool webpage [33] for details).
6
Related work
We already discussed related work in the area of SMT solving and will therefore focus here on
related work in optimization. Optimization problems with logical formulae frequently arise in
practice; examples in process systems engineering include: choosing between multiple possible
treatment technologies in a waste water treatment plant [27] and designing distillation column
conﬁgurations [12]. Typically used techniques in process engineering will ﬁrst translate logical
rules into mathematical constraints (e.g., as detailed in [19]) and then solve the resulting
MINLP problem; this process of formulating a mathematical optimization problem based
on logical constraints and then transforming the resulting problem into a MINLP problem is
known as Generalized Disjunctive Programming (GDP) [30]. Our proposed method of solving
MINLP using SMT technology is therefore complementary to GDP; GDP is an excellent
formulation technology, but transforming to a MINLP problem and then using traditional
optimization methods eliminates the possibility of directly exploiting logical constraints in
the original formulation.
With respect to MINLP solvers based on traditional branch-and-bound approaches [1,
5, 32, 34, 39], the advantage of the overall approach taken in tool ManyOpt is that – as in
most SMT-based approaches – there is support for incremental strategies such as push/pop.
Typical MINLP solvers will fathom, i.e. discard, regions of the tree as soon as they determine
that this region cannot include the global solution.
13

7
Conclusions and Future Work
We have presented ManyOpt, an extensible tool capable of solving non-linear and mixed
optimization problems by relying on SMT solving, thanks to the parallel execution of com-
plementary reduction techniques. While some of those reductions are inspired by existing
techniques, other reductions we developed and integrated into ManyOpt – such as binarized
ﬂattening – are novel and crucial for leveraging the optimization capabilities of our tool. The
experimental results conﬁrm the eﬀectiveness of our tool in solving MINLP problems, which
are not solvable using other state-of-the-art SMT-based optimizers, as these have almost no
support for mixed non-linear arithmetic.
The tool’s architecture is presented in layers that contain a number of features, and the
tool is extensible by adding more features into such layers for further experimentation. In
future work, we mean to extend ManyOpt in this manner and test these new features and
their combinations with further experiments, for example by including the SMT optimizer νZ
in the continuous relaxation optimization layer. This is interesting as this would not require
νZ to deal with mixed arithmetic but only with non-linear arithmetic.
We also would like to implement the capability of dynamic parallel execution in which,
instead of statically determining feature vectors a priori, the fastest features are chosen
dynamically during the execution. For example, while executing the all-in-one method, the
program may run the naive, unbounded binary search and hybrid methods, and it may then
obtain the solution by a diﬀerent method in each all-in-one iteration.
Another important line of investigation is to understand how features used in parallel
executions can share information to use such learned insights for improving the precision and
performance of ManyOpt executions.
Our tool can easily incorporate external constraints to a MINLP problem, as such prob-
lems are represented in SMTLIB 2.0. We will collaborate with Chemical Process Engineers to
explore the beneﬁts of such enrichments of MINLP problems, in terms of decreasing running
times, decreasing the frequency of UNKNOWN replies, and enriching the problem speciﬁcation
so that “what-if” questions can be answered with supporting witness information.
We would like to exploit the POSIX piping within ManyOpt to support other external
SMT solvers as feasibility checkers, notably some SMT solvers speciﬁcally developed for
some subclasses of non-linear real arithmetics [9, 21, 22]. Although such solvers are currently
designed for real arithmetics only, they can be used in our tool, since we would use them to
check the feasibility of continuous relaxations of MINLP problems.
Finally, we would like to understand how search methods from Artiﬁcial Intelligence, for
example Conﬂict-directed A* [42], could interact with – or be integrated in – our tool and
the approaches presented in this paper.
Open-access Code and Research Data: The code for tool ManyOpt and more infor-
mation on our experimental data and results are available at
bitbucket.org/andreacalliadiddio/manyopt
Acknowledgments: This work was supported by the UK EPSRC with Fees Award and
grants EP/N023242/1 and EP/N020030/1. We thank Ruth Misener and Miten Mistry for
14

discussions and advice on MINLP and the use of SMT in solving such problems. Suleeporn
Sujichantararat wrote a MSc thesis [41], supervised by the second author, that shadowed
some aspects of the research program for the tool reported in this paper.
