1
Interaction Histories and Short Term Memory:
Enactive Development of Turn-taking Behaviors in
a Childlike Humanoid Robot
Frank Broz, Chrystopher L. Nehaniv, Hatice Kose-Bagci, and Kerstin Dautenhahn
Adaptive Systems Research Group
School of Computer Science
University of Hertfordshire, UK

Abstract—In this article, an enactive architecture is described
that allows a humanoid robot to learn to compose simple actions
into turn-taking behaviors while playing interaction games with
a human partner. The robot’s action choices are reinforced by
social feedback from the human in the form of visual attention
and measures of behavioral synchronization. We demonstrate
that the system can acquire and switch between behaviors learned
through interaction based on social feedback from the human
partner. The role of reinforcement based on a short term memory
of the interaction is experimentally investigated. Results indicate
that feedback based only on the immediate state is insufﬁcient
to learn certain turn-taking behaviors. Therefore some history
of the interaction must be considered in the acquisition of turn-
taking, which can be efﬁciently handled through the use of short
term memory.
I. INTRODUCTION
S
OCIAL interaction plays a vital role in a child’s develop-
ment. At an early age, children acquire basic social skills,
such as the ability to read social gaze and how to play simple
games that involve turn-taking, that serve as a scaffold for
more sophisticated forms of socially-mediated learning. Chil-
dren learn these skills through interaction with their caretakers,
motivated by intrinsic social drives that cause them to seek out
social engagement as a fundamentally rewarding experience.
Research on the innately social nature of child development
has highlighted the primary role intersubjective experience of
an infant with a carer (e.g. Trevarthen [1], Trevarthen [2]) and
of contingency and communicative imitation (e.g. Nadel et
al. [3], Kaye [4]).
It is desirable to have robots learn to interact in a similar
manner, both to gain insight into how social skills may develop
and to achieve the goal of more natural human-robot interac-
tion. This paper describes a system for the learning of behavior
sequences based on rewards arising from social cues, allowing
a childlike humanoid robot to engage a human interaction
partner in a social interaction game. This system builds on
earlier behavior learning work using interaction histories in our
lab by Mirza and colleagues ([5], [6]) as part of the RobotCub
project [7] on the iCub humanoid developed by our consor-
tium. The goals of this project include providing an open-
platform for cognitive systems research and our work focuses
on the ontogeny of behaviour in such systems.1 The work
follows an enactive paradigm (e.g. [8], [9], [5], [10], [11])
that has been identiﬁed as a promising framework for scaling
behaviour-based approaches to fully learning and developing
cognitive robotic systems (these concepts are expanded on
in Section VII). Autonomy, embodiment, emergence, and
experience play the key roles via situated interaction (including
social interaction) in the course of the ontogeny of cognition
[8], [9], [10]. Temporal grounding via the remembering and
reapplication of experience, as well as the social dimension of
interaction, are a central themes addressed in the interaction
history architecture (IHA), which has been further extended
here.
In this article, the results of a human-robot interaction
experiment are presented that demonstrates how this enactive
learning architecture supports the acquisition of behaviors,
how learned behaviors can be switched between based on
social cues from the human partner, and how the inclusion of a
short term memory in the architecture supports the acquisition
of more complex turn-taking behaviors.
The desire for social contact is a basic drive that motivates
behavior in humans from a very young age. Studies by Johnson
and Morton indicate that infants are able to recognize and are
attracted to human faces [12]. Juscyck has demonstrated that
they are also especially attracted to the sound of the human
voice as compared to other noises [13]. Work by Farroni and
colleagues shows that they are capable of recognizing when
they are the object of another’s gaze, and look longer at the
faces of those looking at them [14]. Nadel’s studies demon-
strate that they are also able to recognize contingent behavior
and prefer it to noncontingent behavior [3]. And from the very
earliest stages of life, many developmental psychologists argue
that they begin to engage in simple interactions with aspects
of turn-taking (e.g. imitating the facial gestures of others
as studied by Meltzoff and Moore [15], in intersubjective
development (Trevarthen and Aitken [16]), and contingency
in interaction and the development of communicative imita-
tion (Kaye [4], Nadel et al. [17], [3])).
Infants thus seem to ﬁnd many aspects of social interaction
1The software developed and used in this work is available open-source at
http://sourceforge.net/projects/robotcub/.
arXiv:1202.5600v1  [cs.AI]  25 Feb 2012

2
innately rewarding. This suggests the possibility of using these
features to provide reward to a developmental learning system.
Such a system would enable robot behavior to be shaped
through interaction in a way that is inspired by the infant-
caretaker relationship and engage humans in a manner that
could assist in scaffolding the development of behavior. Some
possible sources of reward for such a system (based on the
examples given above) could be:
• Presence of a person
• Vocalization/prosody
• Visual attention
• Contingency of another’s actions
• Synchronization of both partners’ actions
This list is organized roughly in order from more immediate
perceptual feedback to qualities of an interaction that appear to
require some history of the relationship between of one’s own
and another’s behavior over time. In this study, feedback based
on immediate perception and on a history of interaction is used
to reinforce behaviors in the learning architecture. A simple
computational model of short term memory is introduced in
order to transiently capture some of this recent history and
facilitate the learning of social interaction behaviors.
II. BACKGROUND
Research in both infant development and in robotics informs
our approach to the developmental learning architecture and
learning scenario presented in this paper. The behaviors that
are investigated in the context of this work on social devel-
opment are gaze and turn-taking. The importance of short-
term memory in social interaction is explored, and relevant
research on the development of short-term memory in infants
is presented. Finally, the use of child-like robots in the study
of human-robot interaction and developmental learning is
discussed.
A. Social Behaviors
1) Gaze: Gaze is an especially powerful social cue. It is
also one that becomes signiﬁcant at an early developmental
stage; a study by Hains and Muir indicates that even young in-
fants are responsive to others’ gaze direction [18]. Corkum and
Moore have demonstrated that infants are able to follow eye
movements from around 18 months of age [19]. The simplest
response to a gaze cue is the recognition of having another’s
visual attention. In a review of the literature on observer
response to gaze, Frischen, Bayliss and Tipper suggest that
this recognition is the basis of and developmental precursor to
more complex gaze behaviors such as joint attention [20]. This
ability is crucial in a social context, as it provides valuable
feedback about whether a nearby person is looking at (and
therefore ready to interact with) someone or whether they are
attending to something else. There is also some evidence that
social gaze is inherently rewarding to people. A recent fMRI
study by Schilbach and colleagues of a joint attention task
found activation of the ventral striatum, an area of the brain
involved in processing reward [21].
2) Turn-taking and Games: Turn-taking plays a fundamen-
tal role in regulating human-human social interaction and com-
munication from an early age. Trevarthen describes how turn-
taking “proto-conversations” between infants and caretakers
set the stage for more complex social interaction and later
language learning [16]. Elias, Hayes and Broerse studied how
mothers control and shape early vocal play with infants into
turn-taking interactions [22]. Rutter’s early studies on turn-
taking conclude that carers appear to train infants how to
engage in conversational turn-taking through interaction [23].
Ross and Lollis suggest that the ability to engage in turn-
taking games is a skill that children begin to develop early in
life [24]. Ratner and Bruner claim that the regularity due to
restriction on possible actions and repetition of simple social
turn-taking games allow infants to learn to predict the order of
events and increase their agency in the interaction by reversing
roles during turn-taking [25]. Turn-taking dynamics do not
depend on the behavior of a single individual but emerge from
the interaction between partners. In human-human interaction
and communication, the role switch between “leader” and
“follower” is not determined by external sources. Humans
manage when to start and stop their turns in social interactions
based on various factors including the context and purpose of
the interaction, feedback from social interaction partners, and
emotional and motivational factors.
Peek-a-boo is a simple social game played with small
children where an adult blocks the child’s view to the adult’s
face with their hands and then lowers them to reveal their
face while saying “peek-a-boo”. This game has often been a
scenario used for the study of social learning in developmental
psychology. Bruner and Sherwood studied mothers playing
peek-a-boo with their children in order to investigate how
parents teach the rules and structure of interaction behavior to
infants [26]. Peek-a-boo has also been used by Rochat et al. in
order to study infants’ ability to recognize regular or irregular
patterns of action in familiar interactions [27]. Gustafson,
Green, and West observed changes in peek-a-boo play as
infants’ mode of play transitioned from passive to active during
development [28]. As children come to understand the nature
of the game, it can take on a turn-taking form, with the adult
and child alternating who is the one hiding their face.
Drumming has also been used to study social interaction in
children. Kirschner and Tomasello demonstrated that children
participating in social drumming tasks (where they drummed
with a present human partner rather than a disembodied beat)
were more likely to adapt their drumming to that of their inter-
action partner [29]. A recent study by Kleinspehn-Ammerlahn
and colleagues showed that the ability to synchronize with
a partner while drumming was age-dependent, improving as
children approach adulthood [30]. A review of the literature
by Accordino, Comer and Heller shows that drums and
other percussion instruments are commonly used in music
therapy for autistic children that seeks to improve childrens’
social skills [31]. A study by Kim, Wigram and Gold on
music therapy that included drum play found improvements
in joint attention and turn-taking behaviors in children with
autism [32].

3
B. Short Term Memory
There is increasing experimental evidence that people rely
on short term memory in order to evaluate others’ social
behavior. A study by Phillips, Tunstall and Shelley demon-
strates that decoding certain kinds of nonverbal social cues
requires the use of short term memory [33]. As found by Fuster
and Alexander, the prefrontal cortex is widely believed to be
involved in storing and processing short term memory [34].
Recent work by Chan and Downing provides evidence that
the prefrontal cortex’s response to human faces (as opposed
to that of other parts of the brain) is focussed on the eyes
and may be involved in gaze processing [35]. FMRI studies
by Kuzmanovic and colleagues suggest that the prefrontal
cortex is involved in making judgements about social gaze
related to gaze duration [36]. The prefrontal cortex has also
been observed to be involved in the processing of temporal
information in short term memory tasks in primates, such
as the recognition of the frequency pattern of a simulus in
work by Romo, Brody and Lemus [37] or remembering the
temporal ordering of events for an action in work by Ninokura,
Mushiake, and Tanji [38].
In child development, researchers are in agreement that
infants are born with limited working memory capacity that
signiﬁcantly improves by the latter half of their ﬁrst year. Most
experimental research on short term memory in infants focuses
on the identiﬁcation of objects, which makes it somewhat
difﬁcult to ﬁnd direct implications for open-ended, movement-
based play interactions (this can be seen in the focus of
the research covered in the recent book on infant memory
by Oakes and Bauer [39]). But some researchers, such as
Chen and Cowan, approach the measurement of short-term
memory in terms of time rather than symbolic chunks [40],
[41]. Studies of working memory in infants performed by
Diamond and Doar and also by Schwartz and Reznick indicate
that they can perform short-term memory based tasks requiring
a memory of up to 10 seconds by around 9 to 12 months of
age [42], [43].
Baddeley and Hitch originally proposed a model of working
memory that included separate information stores for short-
term storage of auditory and visio-spatial information, with a
central executive to process this information [44]. An episodic
buffer was later added by Baddeley to this model in his
theory of working memory [45] to reﬂect the fact that working
memory appears to form associations across different sen-
sory perceptions and make use of this associated information
. Baddeley’s episodic buffer operates on multimodal input
and preserves temporal information, allowing the analysis of
the sequential history of recent experience. The other two
submodules in his proposed model of working memory deal
with the specialized processing auditory and visual and spatial
information. The central executive manages switching between
tasks and selective attention, as well as coordinating the
transfer of information between the other parts of the system.
The form that our short term memory module takes (described
in Section IV-C), operating over a temporal sequence of past
sensorimotor data, is related to Baddeley’s model.
C. Social and Developmental Robotics
The idea of using a childlike appearance to encourage
people to engage in social interaction with a robot in a way
that mimics the scaffolding behaviors that support human
learning is an approach that has been adopted by a number
of researchers in developmental robotics. The robot Affetto
was designed to be infant-like in order to study the role of
the attachment relationship that forms between infants and
their caretakers in child development [46]. The CB2 robot
was designed to learn social skills related to joint attention,
communication, and empathy from humans [47]. The iCub
robot, the robot used in this experiment, is another childlike
robot designed as a platform for research in cogntive systems
and developmental robotics, including the acquisition of social
competencies learned from humans [48]. Other social robots
designed for human-robot interaction, such as Simon [49],
Nexi [50], Robovie [51], and the Nao [52] are designed to be
childlike in either size, facial appearance, or both. However,
for these robots, the design decision was made primarily to
make the robot appealing to interact with rather than speciﬁ-
cally to support developmental approaches to learning through
interaction. Prior to availability of the iCub, the forerunner of
the present architecture [6] was implemented on KASPAR,
a minimally expressive, childlike humanoid developed in our
lab [53].
The iCub is a 53 degree-of-freedom (dof), toddler-sized
humanoid robot. It has a color camera embedded in the
center of each eye. Its facial expression can be changed by
turning on and off arrays of LEDs underneath the translucent
cover of its face to create different shapes for the mouth
and eyebrows. The iCub’s control software, including the
architectures described in this article, is open source and the
source code is available for download as part of the Robotcub
project software repository. The modules that make up its
control system communicate using the YARP middleware for
interprocess communication [54].
Roboticists such as Breazeal and Scassellati and child
development researchers such as Meltzoff have proposed using
robots to study the development of social cognition [55], [56],
[57]. However, these proposed approaches have focussed on
the development of theory of mind and its role in imitation
learning. In our work, we are exploring other mechanisms
that support social engagement. An infant does not need to
understand the motivations or beliefs of another person to
derive enjoyment from their presence and contingent inter-
action. Rather than focussing on intentionality, this system
focuses on the coordination of behavior and social feedback
as mechanisms for scaffolding turn-taking social interactions.
III. RELATED WORK
The study of the emergence of turn-taking has vital impli-
cations in many areas like robot-assisted therapy, especially in
relation to children with autism, where turn-taking games have
been used to engage the children in social interaction [58]. In
many turn-taking studies, the focus has been on evaluating
turn-taking quality rather than learning how to take turns
from the human. Koizumi et al. found that delays and gaps

4
in a robot’s time of response led to negative evaluations by
human participants [59]. Ito and Tani studied joint attention
and turn-taking in an imitation game played with the humanoid
robot QRIO [60]. In this game the human participants tried
to ﬁnd the action patterns, which were learned by QRIO
previously, by moving synchronously with the robot. The
robot KISMET used social cues for regulating turn-taking in
non-verbal interactions with people [61]. Turn-taking between
KISMET and humans emerged from the robot’s internal drives
and its perceptions of cues from its interaction partner, but
the robot did not learn. In a recent study by Chao and
colleagues, humans played a turn-taking imitation game with a
humanoid robot [49]. The purpose of this study was to collect
data in order to investigate the qualities of successful turn-
taking in multimodal interaction. Kose-Bagci and colleagues
studied emergent role-switching during turn-taking using a
drumming interaction with a childlike humanoid robot that
compared various rules for initiating and ending turns [62].
The aim of this research was not to produce psychologically
plausible models of human turn-taking behavior but to employ
simple, minimal generative mechanisms to create different
robotic turn-taking strategies based on social cues. The robot
dynamically adjusted its turn length based on the human’s
last turn but did not learn to sequence the drumming actions
themselves.
Peek-a-boo has been used previously as the interaction
scenario to demonstrate developmentally motivated learning
algorithms for robots. Work by Mirza et al. demonstrated a
robot learning to play peek-a-boo through interaction with
a human using an earlier version of the interaction history
architecture (to be described in the next section) [6]. Ogino
et al. proposed and implemented a developmental learning
system that used reward to select when to transfer information
from an agent’s short term memory to long term memory. The
test scenario used to demonstrate this learning system was a
task of recognizing correct or incorrect performance of peek-
a-boo based on an experiment with human infants [63]. In
both of these studies, peek-a-boo was only behavior acquired
so the systems did not demonstrate the learning of more than
one interaction task within a single scenario.
Kuriyama and colleagues have recently conducted research
on robot learning of social games through interaction [64].
They focus on different aspects of interaction learning than the
work described in this article, using causality analysis to learn
interaction rules by discovering correlations in the low-level
sensorimotor data stream. Our work differs in that it makes use
of social cues (such as human gaze directed at the robot) that
are fundamental to human interaction and representative of the
perceptual capabilities of a human infant (though they may
appear more high-level from a data-processing standpoint).
Also, the social games we seek to learn in this study are
speciﬁed to the human interaction partner, who attempts to
teach the robot a set of speciﬁc skills.2 The robot has only very
minimal social and interactive motivations for what constitutes
success in its behavior in the form of rewards for social
engagment. The focus of the learning is on composing actions
to produce behavior and coordinating the robot’s behavior with
the human’s in the context of interaction and social cues from
the human, and could be used for acquiring various behaviors,
including in principle ones not shown in our experiments.
A. The Interaction History Architecture
This research extends past work on the iCub using the
Interaction History Architecture (IHA). To avoid confusion,
the original system will be referred to as IHA and the modiﬁed
system that is the focus of this article will be referred to as
the Extended Interaction History Architecture (EIHA). EIHA
differs from the previous version in that the types of sensor
input available to the robot has been expanded and a short
term memory module has been added to the architecture.
IHA is a system for learning behavior sequences for interac-
tion based on grounded sensorimotor histories. While the robot
acts, it builds up a memory of past “experiences” (distributions
of sensors, encoders, and internal variables based on a short-
term temporal window). Each experience is associated with
the action the robot was executing when it occurred, as well
as a reward value based on properties of the experience. These
experiences are organized for the purpose of recall using
Crutchﬁeld’s information metric as a distance measure [65].
The information metric (which the authors will also refer to
as the information distance) is the sum of the conditional
entropies of two random variables each conditioned on the
other. Unlike other popular ways of comparing distributions
(such as mutual information or Kullback-Leibler divergence
) it meets the conditions necessary to deﬁne a metric space.
Given two random variables, the information distance between
them is deﬁned as the sum of the conditional entropy of each
variable conditioned on the other.
d(X, Y ) = H(X|Y ) + H(Y |X)
(1)
In IHA, the random variables are sensor inputs or actuator
readings whose values are measured over a ﬁxed window of
time that is deﬁned as a parameter of the system. These values
deﬁne a distribution for each sensor or actuator that is assumed
to be stationary over the duration of time deﬁned by the win-
dow. This vector of variables provides an operationalization
of temporally extended experience for the robot. As the robot
acts in the world, the informational proﬁle (probability dis-
tribution) of this sensorimotor experience (including internal
2As our work is here is a cognitive systems development project, and not
a human-robot interaction study, using an skilled experimenter in the role of
the human interaction partner is appropriate to assess and demonstrate the
capabilities of the system. In particular, its exhibiting particular behaviours
with this interaction partner shows that it is possible for the system to achieve
them in principle. And, its failure to exhibit certain behaviours under particular
settings even with this trained partner suggests that is unlikely to achieve them
with more na¨ıve interaction partners. This allows us to argue that certain
components of the architecture are either sufﬁcient or necessary to achieve
certain behaviours using this enactive cognitive architecture. This, in turn,
lays the groundwork, for further studies that could be carried out with large
groups of human participants, as would be appropriate in future HRI studies.

5
variables) as well as reward is collected as an ‘experience’
in a growing body of such experiences that is structured
as a dynamically changing metric space comprised of such
experiences. The pairwise sum of the information distances
between the variables making up the current experience vector
and a past experience vector are calculated and used as a
distance metric. As the robot acts, the most similar past
sensorimotor experience to its current state is found, and new
actions are probabilistically selected based on their reward
value, which is dynamically changing based on the interaction.
For a full description of the architecture, see prior publications
by Mirza et al. [5], [6].
This architecture is inspired by earlier work by Dautenhahn
and Christaller proposing cognitive architectures for embodied
social agents in which the remembering and behavior are
tightly interwined via internal structural changes and agent-
environment interaction dynamics [9], and is informed by the
enactive paradigm for cognitive architectures (cf. [8], [10]). We
view both the embodiment of the system and its embedding in
a social context to be critical aspects of the system’s cognition.
Our focus on learning through social interactions rather than
an agent learning exclusively by exploring the world on its
own is based on the hypothesis that social interaction was
the catalyst to the development of human intelligence and
therefore is a promising key domain for the development of
robot intelligence [66].
While the original version of IHA implements a model of
remembering in which sensorimotor experiential data may be
recalled in a way that allows experiences to be compared to
one another, it lacks certain characteristics that are useful,
possibly even necessary for learning about social interaction.
IHA makes no use of how recently experiences have occurred.
Also, while experiences are themselves temporally extended,
it is only over a short duration temporal horizon, and only
single experiences rather than sequences of experiences are
compared.
Additionally, in IHA all rewards are calculated based solely
on the current sensor data. For many tasks, especially inter-
action tasks, this is not sufﬁcient to determine whether the
phenomena that should be reinforced is occurring unless the
temporal horizon of experiences has been chosen to match
the task [67]. In many cases, it is necessary to examine a
sequential history of the sensor data for relationships between
an agent’s actions and those of the agent with which it inter-
acts. We hypothesize that ﬂuid turn-taking requires attention to
the recent history of both one’s own and the other’s actions in
order to anticipate and prepare for the shift in roles. In light of
this, EIHA incorporates a short term memory over the recent
history of sensor data relevant to the regulation of turn-taking
(to be described in Section IV-C).
IV. ARCHITECTURE DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
EIHA is intended to support the robot developing different
socially communicative, scaffolded behaviors in the course
of temporally extended social interactions with humans by
making use of social drives and its own ﬁrsthand experience
of sensorimotor ﬂow during social interaction dynamics. The
robot comes to associate sequences of simple actions, such
as waving an arm or hitting the drum, executed under cer-
tain conditions with successful interaction based on its past
experience.
In order to demonstrate these concepts, rewards based
on social drives are designed to inﬂuence the development
of behavior in an open-ended face-to-face interaction game
between the iCub and a human. The human interaction partner
interacts with the robot and may provide it with positive social
feedback by directing their face and gaze toward the robot, as
well as by engaging in drum play. The rewards reﬂecting these
social drives for human attention and synchronized turn-taking
may be based on the current state of the robot’s sensorimotor
experience or on the recent history of experience transiently
kept in its short term memory. The robot uses this feedback
to acquire behavior that leads to sustained interaction with the
human.
The system described in this article focuses on the use
of visual attention as a form of social feedback, and on
the learning of turn-taking behavior to explore issues of
contingency and synchronization in interaction. Two forms of
non-verbal turn-taking are speciﬁed as behaviors to be learned
by the iCub through interaction with a human, peek-a-boo and
drumming.
The implementation of EIHA used for learning the social
interaction game is shown in Figure 1. Details of the sensori-
motor data used as input to the learning system and the actions
available to the robot for this scenario are described. The role
of the short term memory module in assigning reward and
the design of the rewards based on immediate sensor input
and short term memory are explained. Finally, a description
of how this learning architecture supports switching between
learned behaviors during interaction is given.
A. Sensorimotor data
The sensorimotor data whose joint distribution over tem-
porally extended time intervals make up an experience are a
collection of data variables describing the robot’s own joint po-
sitions and both raw and processed sensor input. Continuous-
valued data were discretized using 8 equally-sized bins over
the range of each variable. The raw camera image is captured
as a very low resolution (64 pixel) intensity image. High level
information from processed sensor data is included as binary
variables reporting the presence of a face, the detection of a
drum beat by the human drummer, and whether the human
is currently looking at the robot’s face. A full list of data
variables is given in Table I.
The system takes sensor input from the robot’s eye camera,
an external mic (this input source was not used for the
experiment described in this article), an electronic drum, and
an ASL MobileEye gaze-tracking system [68]. The wearable
gaze tracking system included a head-mounted camera that
records the scene in front of the person. The system outputs
the person’s gaze target within this scene image in pixel
coordinates.
Certain sensor input was processed to provide high-level
information about the person’s current activities. Face detec-
tion was used to locate the human interaction partner’s face in

6
Fig. 1.
Diagram of the Extended Interaction History Architecture (EIHA), sensor input, and robot controller.
the camera image from the robot’s eye, and a binary variable
reported whether or not a person was currently visible to the
robot. Face detection was also applied to the gaze tracker’s
scene camera image to locate the robot’s face, compare the
location to the person’s gaze direction, and report whether the
person was looking at the robot as a binary variable (face
detected in Table I). The Haar-wavelet-based face detection
algorithm implementation in OpenCV was used. The audio
stream from the electronic drum was ﬁltered to extract drum-
beats using the method implemented for the drum-mate system
described in the appendix of Kose-Bagci et al. [62]. Note
also that variables referring to the “engagement score” for
the drumming and hide-and-seek tasks are also a part of
the robot’s experience. Their inclusion links the immediate
experience of the robot to its recent history of observed
behavior as interpreted by the short term memory module.
This relationship will be further explained in Section IV-C.
B. Actions and Behaviors
The robot’s actions are preprogrammed sequences of joint
positions and velocities that make up a recognizable unit of
motion. The full list of 10 actions plus a short-duration no-
op action available to the robot is given in Table II (note that
actions which have the same end point or are reﬂections of one
another are represented by one image). The robot discovers the
reward values of actions for a particular experience during exe-
cution. EIHA probabilistically chooses actions associated with
TABLE I
DATA VARIABLES THAT MAKE UP AN EXPERIENCE IN THE EXPERIENCE
METRIC SPACE.
Data
# of variables
left eye intensity image
64
head position
3
eyes position
3
left arm position
7
left hand position
9
right arm position
7
right hand position
9
face detected
1
beat detected
1
visual attention score
1
drum engagement score
1
hide engagement score
1
Total
107
high reward. Over time, the robot learns behavior sequences by
experiencing sequences of high reward actions and associating
them with a sequence of experiences, and selecting those
actions again when those remembered experiences are similar
to its current experience. It is important to note that while the
low-level actions may have some recognizable “purpose” to
the human interactor, the behaviors that are to be learned are
made up of sequences of these actions. For example, the peek-
a-boo behavior is made up of “hide-face”, “home-position”,
and a single turn of drumming is made up of “start-drum”, an
arbitrary number of “drum-hit” actions, and then “right-arm-
down” or “home-position”. These sequences may also have an

7
TABLE II
LOW LEVEL ACTIONS THAT THE ROBOT SELECTS AMONG DURING EXECUTION (ENDING POSE SHOWN).
right-arm-down,
hide-face
right-arm-up, left-arm-up
right-arm-wave,
start-drum
drum-hit
left-arm-down, home
left-arm-wave
arbitrary number of “no-op” actions interspersed throughout
them, affecting their timing.
C. Short Term Memory Module
In addition to a dynamic memory of sensorimotor experi-
ence and associated rewards, it is also useful to have a more
detailed, fully sequential memory of very recent experience.
This is especially true for skills such as turn-taking, where
the recent history of relationships between one’s own and
another’s actions must be attended and responded to. In IHA,
while the experience metric space preserves the ordering of
experiences (so that rewards over future horizons may be
computed), there is not a mechanism to recall the most recent
experience, only the most similar. Additionally, experiences
aggregate data over a window of time, eliminating potentially
useful ﬁne-grained information about changes in sensor values.
The short term memory preserves temporal information within
selected sensorimotor data over a ﬁxed timespan of the recent
history. Because the short term memory captures relevant
changes in sensor data in the recent history of experience and
an experience accumulates sensor data, it is reasonable for the
length of the short term memory to be of a longer duration
than the experience length, probably several times its length.
The effect of the relationship between experience length and
the duration of the short term memory will be experimentally
investigated in Section VI.
This additional temporal extension of data directly inﬂuenc-
ing action selection is especially important for guiding social
interactions as it allows rewards to be assigned based on these
histories of interaction, rather than just the instantaneous state
of the interaction that the robot is currently experiencing.
History-based engagement scores are included as variables
in the vector that deﬁnes the experience space. Multiple
engagement scores for the memory module may be deﬁned
to process speciﬁc relationships within the data. These scores
are computed over the duration of a sliding window of past
data values with a length deﬁned as a parameter of the
system as the experience length is. This places a performance
measure of the recent history of the robot’s behavior within an
experience, making experiences involving similar immediate
contexts that are part of either successful or unsuccessful
interaction distinguishable to the system.
D. Reward
Of the possible sources of reward arising from internal
motivations discussed in Section II-A, three were selected for
the interaction experiment described in this article. The reward
used by the system was the sum of engagement scores related
to the various forms of social feedback used. One, visual
attention from the interaction partner, was based on immediate
perceptual information. The other two sources of motivation
were based on turn-taking performance, and the short-term
memory module was used to compute their engagement scores.
The two turn-taking behaviors assessed were peek-a-boo
and drumming. Though engagement was calculated differently
for each turn-taking task, the criteria for determining the
quality of interaction was the same. In both cases, the criteria
used to compute the engagement score was
• reciprocity - Are both the robot and the human playing
this game?
• synchronization - Is each of them waiting for the other
to take their turn?
The details of how the engagement scores were computed for
each source are described below.
1) Visual Attention Score: Visual attention was detected
using the gaze direction coordinates reported by the gaze
tracker and the result of running the face detection algorithm
on the gaze tracker’s scene camera. The bounding box for
the robot’s face was found in the image. If the human’s
gaze direction (also reported in pixel coordinates of the gaze
tracker’s scene camera) fell within this bounding box, visual
attention was set to a value of one for that timestep. Otherwise
it was set to zero.
2) Turn-taking Scores: Both of the turn-taking tasks used
knowledge of the characteristic action for the task to compare
the behavior of the human and the robot. The characteristic
action was the action in a sequence making up a behavior
that was necessary in order for the behavior to be recognized
as being related to a task. For peek-a-boo, the characteristic
action was “hide-face” and for drumming it was “hit-drum”.
Both tasks also computed their engagement scores over the
sensor history of the short term memory module, whose
duration was a run-time parameter of the EIHA system. The
details of the engagement score function for each task are
described below. Pseudocode for the computation of the scores
is shown in Figure 3.
For peek-a-boo, at each timestep, it was determined whether
the human and robot were hiding, and then whether only the
human was hiding at that timestep. These variables were kept
in the short term memory. Positive engagement was given
when the human had been hiding for a certain length of time
(between 0.5 and 2.5 seconds) while the robot is not executing

8
Fig. 2.
The human interaction partner’s visual attention toward the robot is
measured using a gaze tracking system.
the hide action. This duration of time represents the expected
length of time that a person would hide their face during peek-
a-boo. Shorter losses of the face are likely caused by transient
failures in face detection. Longer losses are likely to be caused
by a person being absent or having their face (and therefore
attention) directed away from the robot. When the human’s
hiding action fell within this range of time, the reward was
computed as the normalized sum of the durations of robot
and the human’s hide actions over the memory length.
The case were the human is hiding and the robot is not
was used to assign an engagement value because in the
reverse scenario (robot hiding and human not hiding) the robot
partially obscures its view of the interaction partner with its
hands during its hide action, causing face detection failures
that make it difﬁcult to judge whether or not the human is
actually hiding.
For the drumming task, the variables of interest were
whether the robot and human were drumming and whether
they were both drumming at the same timestep. The robot
was determined to be drumming only when it was currently
selecting the characteristic action (so not while it was starting
or ending a turn of drumming). The human was determined to
be drumming when the audio analyser had detected a beat in
the e-drum input within the last timestep. If the robot chose the
hide action while the human was drumming, it received a ﬁxed
size negative engagement score reﬂecting that in this context
that action appeared inattentive to the human. Also, the robot
could only receive positive engagement for drumming when
the human had been drumming within the history of the short
term memory’s length. This constraint limits the engagement
score to turn-taking interactions, rather than allowing the robot
System parameters:
mem length = duration of short term memory module
sliding window (secs)
min time = shortest face tracking loss assumed to be
human hiding face (secs)
max time = longest face tracking loss assumed to be
human hiding face(secs)
resolution = incoming data readings per secord
Compute at each timestep:
human hide = no face found in robot eye camera
robot hide = robot action is ”hide-face”
human only hide = human hide and not(robot hide)
robot drum = robot action is ”drum-hit”
human drum = beat detected from e-drum input
both drum = human drum and robot drum
Keep a running sum of the above variables over
their past mem length values
Calculate peek-a-boo engagement:
hide score = 0
if ((P human only hide < (resolution ∗max time))
and
(P human only hide > (resolution ∗min time)))
hide score =
(P human only hide + P robot hide)/
(resolution ∗mem length)
Calculate drumming engagement:
drum score = 0
if (robot hide)
if (human drum)
drum score = −0.5
else
if (P human drum > 0)
drum score = (0.5 ∗(P robot drum
+ P human drum) −P both drum)/
(resolution ∗mem length)
Fig. 3.
Deﬁnitions of the memory-based engagement scores for peek-a-boo
and drumming.
to increase its score simply by drumming at any time. The
engagement score is a normalized sum of the history of
the human and robot’s drumming, penalized by the sum of
the timesteps when both were drumming at the same time
rather than synchronizing their turn-taking properly. Note that
unlike in the peek-a-boo task, engagement may be negative. In
this task, poor synchronization can be detected and penalized
(unlike in peek-a-boo, where occlusion of the vision system
during hiding may limit perception of the human’s actions).

9
E. Switching between behaviors
One important feature of this system is the ability to switch
between learned behaviors.3 Both interactions (drumming and
peek-a-boo) can be learned during a single episode of extended
interaction with the human teacher. Once learned, the robot can
change between the two learned behaviors to maximize their
reward based on social feedback from the human. For example,
if the robot were playing peek-a-boo with the human, and the
human quit playing and attending to the robot, the robot would
eventually stop repeating the peek-a-boo behavior and start
to explore new action sequences, including possibly initiating
the drumming behavior. If the human responded by drumming
back, the robot would continue the drumming interaction.
At ﬁrst when the human quits playing, the robot’s most
similar experiences from the experience metric space are
experiences from the history of reciprocal, high-reward turn-
taking interaction with the human. As the human fails to
respond, either new experiences of lower reward for the hide-
face action (and thus the peek-a-boo sequence) are created or
the reward associated with that action are revised downward
for the recalled experience (whether experiences are added
to the experience space or existing experiences are revised
depends on current sensor values and on system parameters
of EIHA). Due to the lower reward for the characteristic action
of peek-a-boo, the probabilistic action selection rule is more
likely to explore other actions. Note that any action selected
(such as waving) can be reinforced using visual attention, so it
is possible for the robot to learn behaviors during interaction
other than drumming and peek-a-boo. When the “start drum”
action is selected, the robot will recall experiences from
its recent drumming interaction with the human, making it
more probable that high-reward actions associated with this
history of interaction will be chosen. If the human responds
to the drumming by drumming in turn, the learned drumming
behavior is further reinforced.
V. EXPERIMENT
In order to evaluate the system, we need to demon-
strate whether and under what conditions EIHA can support
the learning of (and subsequent engagement in) turn-taking,
demonstrated using the selected activities of drumming and
peek-a-boo. The experimental setup was that of a face-to-
face interaction with a human teacher/playmate. The human
sat approximately 1 meter away from the iCub with a small
table between them on which was placed the e-drum that the
human used for drumming and the toy drum that the iCub
used. An example of the setup is shown in Figure 4. During
the experiment, the human wore a wearable gaze tracker like
the one shown in Figure 2.
The impact of the short term memory module’s addition in
EIHA was experimentally investigated by allowing the robot to
play the game with a human for multiple trials and examining
3For an example of the robot switching between learned behaviors, see
the video documentation of the system at http://eris.liralab.it/misc/icubvideos/
ihaNew short2 web.mov. In this video, there are also some examples of the
robot initiating attempts at switching between interaction games. In particular
the robot need not necessarily always play the role of follower, but could start
an interaction game of a particular kind itself.
Fig. 4.
The iCub interacts with the human interaction partner using gestures
and drumming.
the outcome in terms of which behaviors were successfully
learned. Three conditions were compared: short term memory
(STM), truncated STM, and no STM. In the no STM condition,
the short term memory module is not used by the system.
The only source of reinforcement in this condition was visual
attention through gaze because the other sources of reward rely
on engagement scores calculated using information from the
short term memory module. Note that in this condition EIHA
operates in the same manner as IHA, with the only difference
between the systems being the extended sensor input in this
implementation. In the STM condition, the robot received
reinforcement from both visual attention and the turn-taking
engagement scores from the short term memory module. In
this condition, the duration of the interaction history used by
the short term memory module was 4 seconds, a length of time
chosen empirically based on the duration of the relevant turn-
taking behaviors. This length of time should typically capture
at least one transition between the robot’s and human’s turn
during well-coordinated turn-taking for both of the behaviors
to be learned. In the truncated STM condition, the short term
memory module computed rewards based only on a 1 second
history of interaction data, a length of time expected not to be
long enough to be able to capture the turn-taking dynamics of
both behaviors. The experience length used by this system was
2 seconds in duration at a 10 Hz sensor rate. The parameter
settings for EIHA were tuned in the earlier implementation of
peek-a-boo learning on the iCub with the original version of
IHA.
The robot performed 5 game trials per condition. Each trial
lasted until either both turn-taking behaviors had been learned
successfully (the criteria by which this was determined is

10
described in the next section) or 10 minutes had elapsed. All
of the trials were performed with a single trained interaction
partner. The experiment was conducted in this manner (rather
than having the robot interact with several naive users) in order
to focus on differences due to task complexity rather than
individual interaction styles. Also, the use of an experienced
interaction partner eliminated the possibility of training effects
over the course of the trials.
VI. RESULTS
One way of measuring the capabilities of the system under
the different STM models is to look at whether turn-taking
behaviors were learned during the trials. The criteria used to
determine whether a turn-taking behavior is learned is the
occurrence of three consecutive robot-human turns of that
behavior. The “consecutive” requirement means that if the
robot introduces additional actions that are not part of the
desired behavior sequence into a turn-taking interaction, the
turn-taking is considered to not have been learned successfully
and previous turns are not counted. This number was chosen
experimentally by observing that once the robot has had a
behavior sequence reinforced to the point where it can engage
in three consecutive turns, it will typically continue turn-taking
with the human as long as it continues to receive positive
reinforcement. It is also able to switch back to the learned
behavior later on in an interaction once this criteria has been
met. The turn-taking was evaluated by manually coding video
recorded of the experimental interactions with the robot. This
method was used rather than relying on data logged from the
robot in order to ensure that the human’s turn-taking actions
were correctly identiﬁed.
There were two criteria used to evaluate the learning perfor-
mance of the different models. First, whether a model could
support the learning of a behavior within the 10 minute trial
length was considered. In cases where different models were
capable of learning a behavior, differences in performance
were evaluated in terms of the amount of time it took for the
system to learn the behavior after the ﬁrst time the robot was
observed to perform the characteristic action for a behavior.
A. Learning success
The difference in the capability of the models to learn
the behaviors within the given trial time was compared. The
percentages of the trials that resulted in the successful learning
of each behavior are shown in Figure 5. It can be seen
that all of the models successfully learned the peek-a-boo
behavior during almost all of the trials. The differences in
learning success for the drumming behavior were greater.
None of the models successfully learned drumming in every
trial, and the no STM model did not learn it during any trial.
Fischer’s exact test was used to evaluate the signiﬁcance of the
differences between the proportions of successes and failures
of the STM model and the other models (see Table III). Based
on the number of successes versus failures alone, the no STM
model’s results showed a statistically signiﬁcant difference for
the drumming interaction (p-value = 0.02). This is a strong
indication that drumming was the more difﬁcult to learn of
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
Peek-a-boo
Drumming
Percentage of successful trials
Interaction type
No STM
Truncated STM
STM
Fig. 5.
The percentage of trials which resulted in at least 3 successful rounds
of turn-taking of either desired turn-taking behavior.
the two forms of turn-taking, and that the short term memory
module played a role in the system’s ability to learn it.
TABLE III
RESULTS OF FISCHER’S EXACT TEST COMPARING THE PROPORTION OF
SUCCESSES AND FAILURES FOR THE MEMORY MODEL VERSUS THE OTHER
MODELS.
Peek-a-boo
Model
p-value
Truncated STM
0.5
No STM
1.0
Drumming
Model
p-value
Truncated STM
0.42
No STM
0.02*
B. Learning time
In addition to differences in the number of successful trials,
it was also expected that there might be differences in the
amount of time it took the system to have the desired behaviors
sufﬁciently reinforced to learn turn-taking. The metric used to
measure the time it took to acquire a turn-taking behavior was
as follows: the start time was determined to be the ﬁrst time
the robot performed the characteristic action for a mode of
turn-taking interaction and the end time was determined to be
the completion of the third of three consecutive turns of that
interaction by the robot. As previously described, for the peek-
a-boo interaction, the characteristic action was “hide-face”. For
the drumming interaction, the characteristic action was “drum-
hit”. The times for the trials are shown in Figures 6&7. Times
for unsuccessful trials are shown as missing bars (marked with
an “X”) in the graphs. Note that of the 5 trials, the robot
failed to learn drumming turn-taking once under the STM
model condition. The robot failed to learn peek-a-boo once and
drumming twice under the truncated STM condition. Under the
no STM condition, the robot did not learn drumming during
any of the trials.
In order to determine whether the difference between the
average times for the models to learn a turn-taking behavior
were statistically signiﬁcant, randomized permutation tests

11
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
1
2
3
4
5
Seconds between first char. action and turn-taking
Trial
Time needed to learn peek-a-boo turn-taking per trial
X
No STM
Truncated STM
STM
Fig. 6.
The time in seconds between the ﬁrst instance of the peek-a-boo
behavior and the completion of 3 rounds of successful peek-a-boo turn-taking
for each trial. X’s indicate that the behavior was not learned before the time
limit for that trial.
 0
 100
 200
 300
 400
 500
1
2
3
4
5
Seconds between first char. action and turn-taking
Trial
Time needed to learn drumming turn-taking per trial
X X
X
X
X
X
X X
No STM
Truncated STM
STM
Fig. 7.
The time in seconds between the ﬁrst instance of the drumming
behavior and the completion of 3 rounds of successful drumming turn-taking
for each trial. X’s indicate that the behavior was not learned before the time
limit for that trial.
using 1000 samples were performed. This test was chosen
because of its ability to handle the small sample sizes and
uneven number of samples (due to the unsuccessful trials)
present in the data. The results are presented in Table IV.
No signiﬁcant differences were found between the average
learning times for the successful peek-a-boo trials. The dif-
ference between the the average times to learn drumming for
the successful trials of the STM and truncated STM models
is moderately signiﬁcant.4 This statistical support, combined
with the difference in the number of successful trials (4
for the STM model and 3 for the truncated STM model),
suggests that there is a real difference in the system’s ability
to learn the drumming interaction depending on the length
of the short term memory used. The learning time for the no
STM model couldn’t be compared for drumming because there
were no successful trials, demonstrating that the STM module
4The randomized permutation test is not an exact test, so the 0.05 signiﬁ-
cance level is approximate.
was a necessary component of EIHA in order to learn this
interaction.
TABLE IV
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN AVERAGE TIMES FOR MEMORY MODEL AND
OTHER MODELS FOR BEHAVIOR ACQUISITION WITH SIGNIFICANCE
RESULTS FROM RANDOMIZED PERMUTATION TESTS.
Peek-a-boo
Model
Avg diff (s)
p-value
Truncated STM
-0.25
0.97
No STM
-5.0
0.85
Drumming
Model
Avg diff (s)
p-value
Truncated STM
177.8
0.05*
No STM
–
–
C. Discussion
These results suggest that a short term memory of interac-
tion is beneﬁcial for the learning of some types of turn-taking
in EIHA, but may not have an impact on others. In order to
understand why peek-a-boo could be learned quickly by all
of the models while drumming could not, it is useful to look
at the characteristics of the two behaviors. Peek-a-boo was
a simpler interaction overall, requiring the learning of shorter
action sequences with less variability in the durations of turns.
The no memory model could not learn the drumming
interaction at all, showing that visual attention feedback alone
was not sufﬁcient for the human teacher to shape this behavior.
The results also demonstrate that the length of the short
term memory had an impact on the amount of time it took
to learn the drumming turn-taking, with the truncated STM
model requiring a longer time to learn the behavior than the
memory model. This is likely because the shorter duration of
the truncated memory contained less information about the
transitions in turn-taking between robot and human (and vice-
versa), making it harder to distinguish examples of successful
turn-taking by their associated reward, which is partially
determined by engagement scores based on information in the
short term memory.
In Mirza’s work on peek-a-boo learning with the original
version of IHA, the learning success was found to be depen-
dent upon the experience length [5]. It was hypothesized that
the duration of an experience should be related to the duration
of an action performed by the robot in order to support
effective learning. The short term memory module provides a
way of relating the recent history of the robot’s actions to those
of its interaction partner. It allows reward values to be based
on changes and relationships in the sensor data over time in a
ﬁne-grained way. We see in this experiment that the duration
of the short term memory also has an impact on learning
success. The short term memory should be long enough to
capture the dynamics of the actions of both participants in an
interaction, and therefore is most effective when it is longer
than the experience length and also based on the duration of
the human partner’s actions.

12
VII. ENACTIVE DEVELOPMENT: ONTOGENY WITHOUT
REPRESENTATION
This work is can be viewed as compatible with an enactive
approach to cognitive systems that has been suggested and
described by philosophers such as Varela, Hutto and No¨e
and used as a guiding principle for the implementation of
working systems by artiﬁcial intelligence researchers such as
Vernon, Dautenhahn and Nehaniv
[8], [9], [69], [70], [5],
[6], [71], [10], [11], [72]. The enactive approach focuses on
behavior and interaction and has been identiﬁed as a promising
framework for the development of cognitive systems. For the
system to acquire and select behaviours in interaction, there is
no need to assume the existence of static entities with prop-
erties characterizable by truth-functional propositional logic
and semantics. Although robot, environment and interaction
partner clearly mutually inﬂuence and shape each others’
behaviors, we follow Brooks in that there is no representation
or model of the world, nor of the self, nor entities in it (“The
world is its own best model”) [73], however, unlike classical
behavior-based systems, our robot learns new behaviors to
select from.
In an enactive cognitive system the ontogeny of cognitive
capacities depends on the processes of sensorimotor and social
interaction and the capacity of the cognitive architecture to al-
low behavior to be shaped by experience (operationally deﬁned
as the temporally extended ﬂow of values over sensorimotor
and internal variables) and feedback in terms of degree of
social engagment, rather than on modeling, symbols or logics.
Different sequences of actions are acquired as regular be-
haviors during interaction. The meaningfulness of the interac-
tion for the human when the robot engages with the human in
more or less complex turn-taking behaviors and the switching
between them are habits of activity dynamically acquired.
These behavioral trajectories can be viewed as “paths laid
down in walking” [8] in a space of possibilities for social
interaction that shape habits and scaffold future development.
This type of interactive history architecture exhibits the capac-
ity for anticipatory prospection [74] and constructing its own
behaviors in interactive development with its environment [6].
Switching between acquired behaviors has been demon-
strated here, but scaffolding of more complex, new behaviors
that build on simpler acquired ones remains a near-term goal
for this type of approach which the architecture should with
little or no extension be able to support. By following explo-
ration in a zone of proximal development (ZPD) (Vygostsky
[75]), variants and new actions could be selected in the
context of interactions based on already acquired behaviors.
Arguably, switching behaviors appropriately in response to
social engagement cues is already a primitive case of this.
The crucial role of timing and relating different scales
of remembering at different scales of temporally extended
experience and behavior as hinted here and in previous work
by Mirza [5]. Short term memory (as studied here) would
seem to have an impact on developmental capacity. Further
study of its role in development as well as of types of longer
term narrative memory would be fruitful directions for future
research. The interactions are “meaningful” in the sense of
Wittgenstein [76] in that behaviors are used in structuring
interaction games via enaction of the acquired behavioral
sequences appropriately in context leading to rewarding social
engagement (related to Peircean semiosis [70]). Imitation and
timing play important communicative roles in structuring the
contingent interactions achieved here, as they do in the case
of human cognitive development [1], [17].
VIII. FUTURE WORK
The role of learning in EIHA is currently restricted to the
learning of the experience space and the associations between
experiences and rewards in order to ﬁnd effective behavior
sequences. But there are opportunities to extend the learning
capabilities of this system in order to expand the number and
types of turn-taking interactions that the system could learn
by making the discovery of turn-taking relationships in the
datastream automatic. While the relationships between sensors
monitored for feedback about turn-taking were predeﬁned in
this case, one could instead use statistical methods to discover
which sensor channels are associated and predictive of one
another. One possibility would be to explore the use of the
cross-modal experience metric proposed by Nehaniv, Mirza
and Olsson [77]. Interpersonal maps, as described by Hafner
and Kaplan, are another way of identifying these relationships
using information metrics [78]. This would allow for task-
speciﬁc turn-taking cues to be discovered, as well as general
task-invariant cues.
Currently, EIHA ﬁnds the distance between individual ex-
periences. But it may be useful to base recall on a longer
temporal horizon of traces of past experiences. The topology
of the experience metric space could be used to make gener-
alizations about experiences over time, using the clustering of
experiences to identify behaviors or interactions. The ability to
make aggregate representations of these clusters that capture
their fundamental properties could possibly allow for more
powerful predictions based on current experience, opening up
the potential of anticipating the actions of others as well as
responding to them.
While gaze is used in this system as a form of social
feedback, the robot has no active gaze behavior. Gaze plays an
important part in regulating face-to-face turn-taking. It would
be useful to support turn taking interactions with appropriate
gaze behavior on the robot’s part, either by learning gaze
behaviors or by making use of a separate gaze controller that
is capable of producing socially appropriate gaze in response
to a human partner.
IX. CONCLUSION
An enactive cognitive architecture based on experiential
histories of interaction for social behavior acquistion that uses
reward based on a short term memory of interaction was
presented. An implementation that allowed the acquisition of
and selection between behaviours for interaction games using
reinforcement from social engagement cures (visual attention
and behavior-speciﬁc measures of turn-taking success) was
described. The architecture provides the developing agent with

13
prospection and behaviour ontogeny based on an operational-
ization of the temporal extended experience, and compared
current experience to prior experiences to guide behaviour and
action selection. Moreover, since it chooses actions based on
prior experience or at times randomly, the robot may play
the role of initiator of the particular type of turn-taking game
in interaction with an human partner. The signiﬁcance of the
short term memory and the importance of using a short term
memory length that is capable of capturing characteristics
of the desired interaction behaviors in such an architecutre
was demonstrated experimentally, showing that the short term
memory had a beneﬁcial effect both on the system’s ability
to acquire some behaviours and the amount of time required
to acquire turn-taking behaviors. The capacity not only to
learn new behaviours, but to actively switch between them
depending on the social cues in the context of interaction with
a human have also been demonstrated.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was mainly conducted within the EU Inte-
grated Project RobotCub (Robotic Open-architecture Technol-
ogy for Cognition, Understanding, and Behaviours) and was
funded by the European Commission through the E5 Unit
(Cognition) of FP6-IST under Contract FP6-004370. The work
was also partially funded also from ITALK: Integration and
Transfer of Action and Language Knowledge in Robots under
Contract FP7-214668. These sources of support are gratefully
acknowledged.
