Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Social Good: A Survey
Zheyuan Ryan Shi, Claire Wang, Fei Fang
Carnegie Mellon University

First draft: January 2020
Abstract
Artiﬁcial intelligence for social good (AI4SG) is a research theme that aims to use and advance artiﬁ-
cial intelligence to address societal issues and improve the well-being of the world. AI4SG has received
lots of attention from the research community in the past decade with several successful applications.
Building on the most comprehensive collection of the AI4SG literature to date with over 1000 contributed
papers, we provide a detailed account and analysis of the work under the theme in the following ways.
(1) We quantitatively analyze the distribution and trend of the AI4SG literature in terms of application
domains and AI techniques used. (2) We propose three conceptual methods to systematically group the
existing literature and analyze the eight AI4SG application domains in a uniﬁed framework. (3) We distill
ﬁve research topics that represent the common challenges in AI4SG across various application domains.
(4) We discuss ﬁve issues that, we hope, can shed light on the future development of the AI4SG research.
1
Introduction
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) is in many ways an important source of change in people’s lives in the 21st
century. Its impact is drastic and real: Youtube’s AI-driven recommendation system would present sports

much faster with machine learning (ML) based auto-completion [2]; many businesses have adopted natural
language processing based chatbots as part of their customer services [3]. AI has also greatly advanced
human capabilities in complex decision-making processes ranging from determining how to allocate secu-
rity resources to protect airports [4] to games such as poker [5] and Go [6]. All such tangible and stunning
progress suggests that an “AI summer” is happening. As some put it, “AI is the new electricity” [7].
Meanwhile, in the past decade, an emerging theme in the AI research community is the so-called “AI
for social good” (AI4SG): researchers aim at developing AI methods and tools to address problems at the
societal level and improve the well-being of the society. Over the years, there have been several suc-
cessful AI4SG projects, such as guiding municipal water pipe replacement [8], protecting wildlife from
poaching [9], and spreading HIV prevention information among homeless youth [10]. AI4SG has received
recognition from both within and outside the academic community. Major AI conferences have featured
various special tracks and workshops dedicated to AI4SG, with over 1000 papers on AI4SG topics formally
published. Large companies are expanding their investments on AI4SG initiatives. The need for collabora-
tion among researchers, governments, companies, and non-proﬁt organizations to solve AI4SG problems
has never been more widely appreciated.
1
arXiv:2001.01818v1  [cs.CY]  7 Jan 2020

What exactly is AI for social good?
As we celebrate the progress of AI and AI4SG, let us take a step
back to ponder what AI4SG really means. AI4SG is a vague concept, given that neither AI nor social good
has a widely accepted deﬁnition. Some of the recent eﬀorts try to deﬁne AI4SG based on the realized or
potential social impact and non-proﬁt nature. However, there is no consensus on such a deﬁnition. One can
argue that “social impact” is both too exclusive and inclusive: lots of AI4SG research has not (yet) achieved
any tangible social impact, and AI research that does have some social impact may not be doing good.
The “non-proﬁt nature” is similarly debatable since for-proﬁt industry companies arguably contribute a
lot to AI4SG, and the majority of research on AI and transportation, which most people would count in
AI4SG, is not always intended for non-proﬁt applications. Currently, the most popular set of eﬀorts is to
describe AI4SG by listing the application domains of AI technologies, or even simpler, referring to “societal
challenges, which have not yet received signiﬁcant attention by the AI community”.1 As Berendt points
out, social good (common good) is referred to as a goal, but not deﬁned [11].
We do not attempt to propose any new deﬁnition of AI4SG. In this survey, we adopt the widely used
approach by enumerating several application domains. This is not perfect, as we will unavoidably miss
some works. However, by doing this we are able to provide a systematic overview of the ﬁeld, while the
community continues to discuss and iterate on a better deﬁnition. In fact, we believe that the lack of precise
deﬁnition might be more of a strength for the development of AI4SG than a problem. Just like the lack of
common deﬁnition for AI helped the ﬁeld to grow and innovate beyond its boundary, we think an inclusive
boundary of AI4SG could encourage more researchers to contribute to this area.
Why write this survey
AI4SG as a research theme has grown tremendously in the past decade. We
believe this is the time to summarize the progress and identify the research and non-technical challenges
so far. The existing surveys or survey-like papers are inadequate in the following four aspects which we
attempt to address.
First, the literature lacks a comprehensive survey of this domain. Berendt provides a survey of 99 AI4SG
papers, focusing on publications from a few (mostly data science) workshops [11]. The CCC report [12]
and Cowls et al. [13] cover a few successful projects from the highly regarded venues, yet lack the breadth
of coverage. Chui et al. [14] built a collection of 160 AI4SG projects, yet these projects are not explicitly
discussed in the paper. We cover over 1000 AI4SG publications at major AI venues in the past 12 years and
provide a detailed account of the research in eight major application domains.
Second, we provide the ﬁrst quantitative analysis of the AI4SG research projects. We show the trend
of each application domain and AI technique in terms of the number of papers published. We also identify
the hot spots that have attracted the most research eﬀort in the current AI4SG community.
Third, most of the current literature discusses the AI4SG literature according to application domains
without a systematic approach to analyze and categorize AI4SG research. We use three conceptual methods
to group the existing works and to dissect each application domain. These categorizations yield insights
into how one can identify concrete “social good” problems that AI can be used to address.
Fourth, existing works do not adequately draw the two-way interaction between the technical ad-
vances in AI research and the applications. In addition to using advances in AI for societal applications, we
emphasize that applications in many diﬀerent domains also motivated advances in some common mean-
ingful research directions. We distill several technical research topics stemmed from the nature of AI4SG
research.
Nonetheless, we leave out a few aspects of AI4SG which are already covered in previous works. The
interested reader might refer to the work of Berendt [11] for a more detailed discussion on “what is social
1https://aaai.org/Symposia/Spring/sss17symposia.php
2

good, are we really doing good, and how to ensure that we do good?”. Chui et al. [14] have more discussion
on the action plan for those outside the academic research community.
Target audience
This survey is primarily targeted at researchers in the AI research community who
desire to make a positive and tangible impact in the social good domains.
AI4SG has a wide range of stakeholders: AI researchers who aspire to make positive social impact,
researchers in other domains who hope to leverage the promise of AI, practitioners who provide the “in-
frastructure” in place and who make everything in this community possible, funding agencies which decide
on grant and resources allocations for AI4SG projects, companies which want to utilize their talent and
resources in-house to promote corporate social responsibility, media that shape the public discourse of AI
and its positive (and negative) impact on our society, and most importantly, everyone who will be aﬀected
by the AI4SG projects, and that is, everyone.
Our survey is mainly tailored to the AI research community. However, we believe that the present
paper will also be informative to other stakeholders of AI4SG. In particular, we show in the paper the
current development of AI4SG, the application domains and speciﬁc problems that have been studied, and
the AI4SG projects that have been successfully deployed.
The scope of this survey
In this survey, we focus on the AI technologies which are developed within the
AI communities with the primary purpose of producing positive outcomes for inherent societal problems.
As AI technologies become increasingly powerful and democratized, we note several unfortunate cases
where AI is developed for outright malicious use, e.g. DeepNude [15], or for highly dubious purposes [16].
We believe such cases represent an urgent and complex problem that the AI community, and much more
beyond the AI community, need to address together. Such malicious use of AI is equally important as using
AI to produce positive outcomes. In this survey, we focus on the latter and refer the reader to the work of
Brundage et al. [17] for detailed coverage of the malicious use of AI.
We leave out the emerging literature on the fairness, accountability, transparency, and ethics problems
of AI solutions to social good problems, which is surveyed in a few recent papers [18, 19, 20]. In the present
work, we focus on inherent societal problems (including, e.g. inequality and fairness) but not the “second-
order problems” about the AI solutions. However, we do believe these issues are critical to the successful
delivery of AI4SG solutions and we encourage the community to make more progress.
AI and public policy is another important area related to AI4SG. The reader may refer to the AI Now
report [21] for a detailed treatment of the current topics.
The majority of works surveyed in this paper originate from (or partially from) the AI community. We
recognize that the use of AI techniques has a growing presence in disciplines other than computer science.
For each application domain, we will brieﬂy discuss the relevant literature from within the domain, where
applicable.
Outline
This survey is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide an overview of the AI4SG literature.
We characterize the distribution and trend of AI4SG research over application domains and AI techniques.
In Section 3, we review the eight main application domains of AI4SG research. For each domain, we
introduce the key topics and challenges to which AI has been applied, and a case study on a successfully
deployed AI4SG project. In addition to applying AI techniques to societal problems, it is also part of
AI4SG research that the experience from application motivates and leads to advances in several key AI
research directions. In Section 4, we distill ﬁve such AI research topics which have their root across multiple
application domains. Section 5 features a discussion of several important aspects of AI4SG research such
as evaluation and deployment. We summarize the paper in Section 6.
3

2
Overview of the AI for Social Good Literature
2.1
Literature Selection
For this survey, we selected 1176 papers from the AAAI,2 IJCAI,3 IAAI,4 AAMAS,5 KDD,6 and COMPASS7
conferences from the years 2008-2019, to analyze the trend of AI4SG research. Starting from Section 3,
we discuss over 400 papers in detail, introducing the problems they address and the AI techniques being
used. AAAI and IJCAI are general conferences on AI, which capture most of the relevant sub-topics in
AI. AAMAS and KDD feature works in multi-agent systems and data mining, two sub-topics of AI that
have lots of AI4SG related works. Each of these four conferences has some application-related track or
session, which is exactly the type of paper we wish to focus on. IAAI is a dedicated venue for the deployed
or emerging applications of AI in the real world. We chose COMPASS for its focus on “computing and
sustainable societies”. Although it is not an exclusively AI-focused venue, it nevertheless has an ample
amount of AI- and AI4SG-related work. In a future version, we also plan to include AI4SG-related works
at conferences on other sub-topics of AI, such as natural language processing (e.g. ACL8) and computer
vision (e.g. CVPR9).
For each of AAAI, IJCAI, and AAMAS, we went through their proceedings and programs on their re-
spective websites for the years 2008-2019 and looked for any relevant sections to the topic of AI4SG. Specif-
ically, we looked for sections with titles matching any of the following: Multidisciplinary Applications,
Applications, Machine Learning Applications, Computational Sustainability, AI for Social Impact/Social
Good, AI and Humans, or AI for Improving Human Well-being. For other venues, including KDD, IAAI,
and COMPASS, we took all papers from the proceedings.
After collecting all the papers, we then came up with initial sets of 20 keywords or phrases for each of
the eight following domains: agriculture, education, environmental sustainability, healthcare, combating
information manipulation, social care and urban planning, public safety, and transportation. In particular,
information manipulation includes challenges such as misinformation and reputation fraud; social care
and urban planning include topics such as public services and crisis management. We also created similar
keyword sets for each of the 16 following AI sub-topics: computer vision (CV), robotics, planning, routing
and scheduling, multiagent systems, natural language processing (NLP), knowledge representation and
reasoning, human computation and crowdsourcing, constraint satisfaction and optimization, game playing
and interactive entertainment, game theory and economic paradigms, heuristic search and optimization,
cognitive modeling, cognitive systems, reasoning under uncertainty, human-AI collaboration, and machine
learning (ML). We chose these 16 sub-topics according to the keywords of AAAI-19.10 We then tagged
each paper with any domain areas and techniques for which the title or abstract contained a keyword
corresponding to those domains/techniques, making use of nltk.stem.
After performing this keyword matching once for all papers collected, we manually looked through the
abstracts of all papers that were not tagged with any domain area and, if we deemed them relevant to one
of our AI4SG domains, added some salient keywords from the abstract to our collection of keywords. After
this manual review, we re-ran the keyword matching using the updated keyword base. (We also brieﬂy did
2The AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
3International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
4Conference on Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
5International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems
6ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining
7ACM SIGCAS Conference on Computing and Sustainable Societies
8Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
9IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
10https://aaai.org/Conferences/AAAI-19/aaai19keywords/
4

the same manual inspection with papers without a technique tagging, though for such papers it became
clear that they simply did not reference any technical attributes in the abstract or title.) After the updated
keyword matching, we manually inspected the matched papers and remove those that are not actually
relevant to the domain. The collection of papers and the script can be found in our GitHub repository.11
2.2
Distribution and Trend
First, we summarize our ﬁndings in Fig. 1. In general, across all domains and techniques, the number of
papers pertaining to any of our listed AI4SG domains increased over time. In 2008, there were 18 papers on
AI4SG and in 2019 we have 246, suggesting that research interest in AI4SG has been generally increasing
in recent years.
As shown in Fig. 1a, all domains have generally witnessed an upwards-tending trend in the number
of papers published. Healthcare has received the most attention among all application domains. The
diﬀerence between it and other domains appears to be widening, with the works on healthcare count
32% of the total literature on AI4SG in 2019. Transportation has a steady increase in publications and
ranks second in the total number of papers in the past years. On the other hand, agriculture, education,
and social care and urban planning have been the topics with the smallest literature across the years.
This trend is likely due to the fact that both transportation and healthcare are well-established disciplines
even outside of the computational realm. Many research topics within these areas are already mature
without the presence of AI techniques. It is also relatively easier to gather data in these domains, with
existing architecture such as electronic health records and traﬃc monitoring systems. Furthermore, the
data pertaining to transportation and healthcare are usually in a precise, structured format that can be fed
directly to an AI algorithm. On the other end of the spectrum, data pertaining to realms like social care
and education are often in forms like interviews and questionnaires. Such data are harder to both collect
and parse. Further, these two domains, along with that of agriculture, do not have well-established existing
frameworks for data collection to begin with, further exacerbating the lack of data for analysis and usage
with AI algorithms.
Up until 2016, environmental sustainability was among the most popular domains in AI4SG research,
until transportation surpassed environmental sustainability. This could potentially be explained by a ten-
dency for research done in the transportation domain being ultimately motivated by sustainability and
energy eﬃciency. Interestingly, around 2013 the domains of healthcare, combating information manipula-
tion, and transportation all had roughly the same frequencies; after that, healthcare saw a steep increase
in frequency, perhaps explained by recent advancements in the industry.
In Fig. 1b we show the trend of AI techniques in the AI4SG literature. ML has been a consistently dom-
inant technique in AI4SG papers, and its usage has surpassed that of other techniques even more in recent
years (since 2013). This comes with little surprise, especially as keywords relating to ML techniques are
quite generic and may encompass other, more speciﬁc techniques. For example, most of the recent work in
computer vision (CV) and natural language processing (NLP) is built upon ML techniques. Planning, rout-
ing, and scheduling and constraint satisfaction and optimization have both been on a slower and somewhat
unsteady upwards trajectory in the number of papers through the years. On the other hand, techniques
like cognitive modeling, game-playing and interactive entertainment, and knowledge representation have
stayed nearly stagnant in terms of the rate of publication over the years.
Fig. 2 shows a heatmap that visualizes the connection between application domains and AI techniques,
in which we plot the number of papers falling into each (technique, domain) pair. We note that the numbers
11https://github.com/AIandSocialGoodLab/AI4SG-Survey
5

(a) Evolution of AI4SG application domains
(b) Evolution of AI4SG AI techniques
Figure 1: Trend of AI4SG publications in diﬀerent domains and with diﬀerent techniques.
6

Figure 2: Heatmap of AI4SG paper domains and techniques.
for each application or technique are not equal to the summation of numbers in the respective column/row
since each paper might belong to multiple application domains and techniques.
The heatmap again reveals the prevalence of ML techniques, regardless of the domain. Techniques like
game-playing and interactive entertainment, cognitive modeling, and knowledge representation are very
infrequently utilized. We also see again that application domains like transportation, healthcare, public
safety, and environmental sustainability are the most frequently studied in AI4SG papers.
The hottest combination is unsurprisingly machine learning in healthcare with 174 papers which sur-
passes all other combinations by a large margin. Within the transportation domain, planning and con-
straint satisfaction are frequently utilized techniques. This makes sense given transportation’s natural
domain properties of being constrained by a number of dynamic variables and needing to plan sequences
of actions. Within public safety, game theory is a popular approach since it characterizes the adversarial
nature of many problems in this domain. Another hot combination that stands out is the usage of human
computation techniques towards combating information manipulation. This is another natural pairing,
may be explained by the ease of analyzing information in mass media via the many consumers of such
information.
7

3
Research Progress in AI for Social Good
We survey eight application domains where the AI4SG literature has made signiﬁcant progress. In addition
to introducing the existing work, we attempt to address a broader question in the AI4SG research: what is
a concrete social good problem which AI can help to address.
We propose to use three conceptual methods to systematically think about this question: in terms of
the topic structure of the domain, the scope of the problem with respect to the agents involved, and func-
tionality of the AI intervention. First and foremost, one can adopt the domain’s perspective by tracing
the supply chain and identify pain points along the way, thereby determining the topics of social good
problems worth investigating in this domain. Using agriculture as an example, we consider two sequential
topics: crop management and the agricultural produce market. One can further break down crop man-
agement into the following steps (sub-topics): crop planning, crop maintenance, crop yield prediction, and
crop disease mitigation. In this way, we can identify the topics on AI for agriculture.
As the second approach, we propose a uniform structured AEC (agent – environment – community)
framework to classify the current eﬀorts in all AI4SG application domains based on the scope of the problem
with respect to the agents involved, and to structure thoughts on identifying new problems to work on.
An agent is the smallest eﬀect unit that has a direct interest in the output of the AI solution, e.g. a
patient with some disease, a driver traveling from location A to location B, a farmer growing certain crop.
A problem is in the “agent” category if we can discuss all the factors and the solution of the problem
restricted to a single agent. Problems in this category include choosing the right crop for a farmer to grow
and disease diagnosis based on X-ray images.
A problem is in the “environment” category if the problem conceptually involves multiple agents, and
those agents are considered as a population without interactions and/or heterogeneity. For example, when
predicting the traﬃc ﬂow, typically one does not consider how the drivers interact and instead studies the
system-level behavior.
A problem is in the “community” category if the problem conceptually involves multiple heteroge-
neous agents with explicit consideration of their interactions. For example, when designing the pricing
mechanism of a ride-sharing platform using AI, we can take into account the drivers and riders’ diﬀerent
incentives and preferences and their interactions.
A speciﬁc research topic might have multiple types of problems. Citizen science is scientiﬁc research
conducted in part by nonprofessional (citizen) scientists who, for example, contribute data and observation
to the research eﬀort. Correcting the bias in citizen science data might belong to “environment”. Incen-
tivizing citizen scientists to collect better data might belong to “community”.
The third approach is to consider the functionality of the AI intervention, and we propose to use the
DPP (descriptive – predictive – prescriptive) framework. Descriptive analysis aims to provide insight into
the current and previous phenomenon, like using animal images to get an animal census in a conservation
area. Predictive analysis focuses on predicting what might happen in the future, like predicting whether a
patient will be readmitted based on electronic health records. Prescriptive analysis emphasizes providing
advice on what to do next, like how to allocate security resources in an airport.
In the sequel, we discuss one application domain in each subsection. For each domain, we ﬁrst provide
a table listing a few example problems by the AEC and DPP frameworks. Then, we discuss the current
research eﬀorts bundled by the topic structure. Towards the end of each subsection, we include a case
study of a representative AI4SG project. We select this project from all the AI4SG projects in this domain
that have been deployed/piloted in the real world. We analyze this project using a framework adapted
from NetHope’s AI for good guide [22]. For each project, we introduce the target problem, the previous
practice (before the AI intervention) and explain why AI could help. After providing an overview of the
8

AI intervention, we identify the key data and resources required for such a project. In addition, we discuss
the current status of the project, especially after the paper publication. We also analyze in retrospect what
part of the AI solution worked and what part did not work. Finally, we are aware that the literature we
surveyed does not contain all the work on this topic. Therefore, for each application domain, we point the
interested reader to surveys of the AI methods used in the domain which are published in the application
domain’s research community, where applicable.
3.1
AI for Agriculture
Agent
Descriptive
Crop disease diagnosis [23]
Predictive
Crop yield prediction [24]
Prescriptive
Crop choice recommendation [25]
Environment
Descriptive
Crop growth modeling (Modeling crop disease [23])
Predictive
Prescriptive
Growing conditions prediction (Drought prediction [26])
Community
Descriptive
Predictive
Produce price forecasting [27]
Prescriptive
Alternate market designs (Electronic agriculture marketplace [28])
Table 1: AEC and DPP categorization of research on AI for agriculture.
The United Nations estimates that the world needs to feed two billion additional people by 2050 [29],
which presents a signiﬁcant challenge to the global agriculture capacity. Meanwhile, currently 45% of the
world’s population lives in rural areas and 26.7% sustains their living through agriculture [30]. Thus, to
improve agriculture is to address both today’s and tomorrow’s problems. AI has lots of potential in this
domain and we believe that much more work could be done. Table 1 shows some example works on AI
for agriculture and we classify them under the AEC and DPP structure. In this subsection, we follow the
agriculture supply chain and group the existing works into two topics, crop management and agricultural
marketplace.
3.1.1
Crop management
The most intuitive and fundamental goal of AI for agriculture is to improve crop management and boost
crop yield. The progress and commercialization of UAVs, satellite images, and IoT have rendered data that
are unprecedented in both quantity and precision. These data sources enable AI to boost the eﬃciency of
farming, promoting the so-called “precision agriculture”. With them, it is possible to address the various
aspects of crop management, such as crop planning, maintenance, yield prediction, mitigating crop disease,
and agricultural information gathering.
Crop planning
Deciding on what crop to grow and when to grow could be seen as the ﬁrst step of
crop management. [25] uses multi-objective evolutionary algorithms to determine, based on the soil infor-
mation, the optimal crop to grow for sustainable land use. The optimization criteria include the costs of
fertilizing and liming, cultivation, and the expectation and variation of total return. Other works explore
selecting the best time to sow based on additional factors such as the weather information. A pilot study
in India instructed farmers to delay planting by three weeks using predictive models based on climate and
weather data and increased the yield by 30% [31].
9

Crop maintenance
Second, crop maintenance is critical to the yield. There are many aspects where
AI can help. On the one hand, advanced sensing technologies show much promise for AI. On the other
hand, these headline technologies are still far from reaching an average farmer. AI can also help to leverage
existing tools and resources for farmer’s use. For example, crop evapotranspiration information is useful
for optimizing irrigation plans, yet its accurate measurement is limited due to the sparse evapotranspiration
network. [32] propose using the Gaussian Process to estimate this information with data from ordinary
weather stations, and the approach has been demonstrated to work well in Texas.
Crop yield prediction
Third, being able to predict the crop yield can often help farmers plan for the
coming year and help the government determine agricultural policy. While lots of work have developed
the key features to make this prediction, these features are often costly to compute in practice. Remote
sensing products, speciﬁcally satellite images, provide a cheap alternative. [24] not only use deep learning
models to predict the crop yield from satellite images but also design a compact representation of the images
to address the scarcity of labeled data and use a Gaussian Process model to address the spatial-temporal
variation.
Mitigating crop disease
Crop disease is a major cause of poverty in developing countries. Quinn et
al. [23] propose several approaches to address problems related to crop disease, including using Gaussian
Process ordinal regression to estimate disease distribution, using this model for survey planning, and using
CV techniques including scale-invariant feature transform on photos for crop disease diagnosis. A mobile
app based on [23] and its follow-up works is now available [33].
Agricultural information gathering
At a macro level, it is also valuable to gather data on which crops
are grown where. [24] makes use of deep Gaussian processes to infer agriculture information from satellite
imagery. [34] enables farmers to monitor their crops at low cost via aerial imaging, which relies on CV
and path-planning algorithms.
3.1.2
Agriculture produce market
Aside from dealing with crops in the ﬁeld, the agriculture market is also vital to a farmer’s life. AI tech-
niques such as time series analysis and algorithmic mechanism design have much potential in this domain.
Being able to predict the price movement can greatly beneﬁt the farmers, as the ﬂuctuation of produce
price directly determines a farmer’s income. An agricultural market, especially in developing countries,
is diﬀerent from, say, a stock market in its lack of information and infrastructure. [27] use the nearest
neighbor model to predict the agricultural market price in India.
However, even if we can predict the produce prices accurately, the farmers may still face diﬃculties on
the market. These markets have limited information ﬂow and high transaction costs and pose a signiﬁcant
requirement to the mobility of the farmers. Thus, other works have explored setting up a better market
to connect the farmers. [28] used over ﬁve years to set up a text message-based agricultural market in
Uganda. We discuss this work in more detail in the following case study.
3.1.3
Case study: Kudu – an agricultural market in Uganda
Target problem
Farmers in Uganda often lack adequate information about the agricultural market in
the country, which puts themselves at a disadvantage when they sell their produces. Newman et al. attempt
to set up, Kudu, an electronic agricultural market to facilitate the information ﬂow [28]. The problem ﬁts
into “community – prescriptive” in the AEC – DPP framework.
10

Previous practice
There are markets in both cities and rural areas, but they are quite diﬀerent in terms
of the scale, price, and participants. These markets often feature inconsistent availability of produce and
arbitrage opportunities. For example, the country has lots of tomato growers but occasionally one cannot
ﬁnd any tomato at the roadside markets. One can do temporal and spatial arbitrage without much diﬃculty.
A main reason is that individual farmers in the rural areas often do not have suﬃcient information about
the national market, and as a result the farmers also miss lots of opportunities.
Why is AI needed
The primary problem is to make it easier for individual farmers to get access to
the national market. Uganda has excellent cell phone coverage which makes an electronic marketplace
possible. However, it is too much cognitive burden for a human to match the sellers and buyers, while
AI could automate the process and ensure that the new marketplace functions properly. In addition, the
electronic marketplace has great value in itself, because it saves the farmers from point-to-point face-to-
face communication and makes the transactions more eﬃcient.
Intervention overview
The authors proposed and implemented a text message-based agricultural mar-
ket using mechanism design. Both buyers and sellers can post to the market. There is a central clearing-
house and the authors have attempted an AI-based clearing mechanism which runs a maximum weight
matching algorithm as well as a hybrid system that combines AI-based and manual clearing. Once a bid
and ask are matched, the bidder and the seller will travel to meet in person and the transaction happens
oﬄine.
Data used
To propose a match, the authors used Uganda’s road network data to incorporate the trans-
portation cost into consideration, which can be readily obtained online. Other values core to the market
are not data-driven and are estimated based on heuristics. However, the local farmers are reluctant to adopt
the system unless the authors also provide the average market price. These data are easy to obtain once
the authors have collaborated with a local partner to obtain these data.
Resources needed
Beyond doubt, any implementation and maintenance of a market like this need con-
tinued funding. The authors collaborated with several local agencies, who are vital to the deployment of
any kind, in terms of local knowledge, social connections, local outreach, etc.
Deployment status
Since its initial deployment in 2013, Kudu has attracted over 21000 users and facil-
itated over 850 veriﬁed transactions, with a total transaction value of over 1.9 million USD. In comparison,
the agricultural share of Uganda’s GDP was around 6.5 billion USD. Thus, there is no doubt that Kudu
has obtained a signiﬁcant scale and reach. In the paper [28], it is stated that the grant funding for this
project ended in March 2018. This is also the time that Kudu’s website12 stopped updating. Nevertheless,
the authors report that their local partners planned to continue the operation.
AI in retrospect
The core of a designed market is its market-clearing algorithm. Some of the desired
properties of a market are motivated by the diﬃculties in their previous pilots. For example, too sparse
clearing frequency drives the farmers away from the platform because people do not want to wait that long,
and a continuous clearing thus might be desirable. Yet it is hard to analyze whether some other properties
are eﬀective in practice. For example, one desired property in mechanism design is to maximize the social
welfare, and in this case, the total gain from trade. However, not all trades matched on the platform actually
12https://kudu.ug/
11

happened due to the primitive trade execution situation. Thus, maximizing welfare at clearing might not be
useful in practice. In general, the work suggests that human clearing cannot be substituted by algorithmic
clearing in Uganda and a hybrid approach might be more reasonable. Furthermore, the authors choose to
base the market primarily on text messages, as they observed that text messages are much more accessible
than, say, computer and the Internet. However, during deployment, most of the transactions happened
through phone calls with human coordinators, an arguably low-tech intervention compared to what the
authors intended. That said, this is one of the very few attempts from the community to build a non-trivial
market from scratch. Understanding all the practical constraints introduces to the research community
many valuable problems to ponder.
3.1.4
Other works
Outside the AI community, there have been lots of attempts to apply AI/ML techniques to address agricul-
tural issues. We refer the interested reader to [35] for a survey of these works.
3.2
AI for Education
Agent
Descriptive
Predictive evaluation (Modeling student learning state [36])
Predictive
Individual performance prediction [37]
Prescriptive
Problem and solution generation [38]
Environment
Descriptive
Modeling student engagement [39]
Predictive
Student performance prediction (Identifying at-risk students [40])
Prescriptive
Online education platforms [41]
Community
Descriptive
Predictive
Problem diﬃculty prediction [42]
Prescriptive
Administration improvement [43]
Table 2: AEC and DPP categorization of research on AI for education.
For many, education represents and enables future growth and opportunity. Literacy in language, math,
and sciences, and other essential skills empower individuals to participate in today’s global economy and
perhaps break cycles of poverty. However, the United Nations reports that in low-income countries, 91% of
students in primary school fail to achieve minimum reading proﬁciency, and 87% fail to achieve basic math
proﬁciency [44]. The application of AI to this domain has the potential to provide equal opportunities to
all students worldwide, thereby investing in future innovation and global development. We believe much
more work could be done in this domain. We classify some sample works on AI for education in Table 2
using the AEC and DPP structure. In this subsection, we introduce the existing works on both teaching a
speciﬁc skill and education issues in a community environment.
3.2.1
Students and a (virtual) teacher
Personalized education has long been an ideal for families around the world. Although technology has
permeated into many aspects of education, the fundamental ways in which the teachers teach and the
students learn have not changed much. The progress of AI is now starting to bring us a little bit closer
to this ideal. The ﬁrst step is to develop AI which functions as an assistant to, or even a substitute for,
12

teachers. We discuss problem-level and curriculum-level problems, two types of tasks that AI has been
used to address, which diﬀer by the length of interaction with the student.
Problem-level AI for education
In this category, AI is developed to facilitate a concrete procedure
in the student’s learning process, including problem generation, problem-solving, grading, and diﬃculty
prediction. These works necessarily focus on a speciﬁc discipline and leverage the special structure of that
domain. For example, Wang and Su propose to use natural language generation aided with dimensional
units to generate math exercise problems [45]. They also developed automated reasoning techniques to
generate problem solutions [38]. Similar tasks have been attempted in logic problems [46]. When the
problem has a deﬁnitive solution, works on grading focus on giving proper credit to partial solutions.
Without a deﬁnitive correct answer [47], such as essay writing, one could use natural language processing
to assess the quality and provide feedback [48]. Computer programming is a key area that has seen lots of
development in terms of generating pattern programs [49] and program error checking [50, 51, 52]. One
level above, there is also work that explore generating an exam with the right combination of problems
against a student population [53], and predicting the diﬃculty of the problems [42].
Curriculum-level AI for education
Intuitively, helping a student master a curriculum is intrinsically
diﬀerent from grading a student’s essay since it takes time and repeated eﬀort to master a skill which
could have many building blocks. The tasks in this category typically feature repeated interaction with
the student. Intelligent tutoring systems (ITS), which use AI techniques to provide step-by-step tutoring,
monitor student’s progress, and oﬀer instant feedback, are not a new concept [54]. Recent works integrate
a data-driven approach like graphical models [55, 36], factorization machines [56], or recurrent neural
networks [37] into ITS to model the student’s learning state. In addition, Valentine et al. employ sketch
recognition techniques to assist instructors in homework assignments [57].
Researchers also tried to develop AI technologies to assist student learning beyond the well-established
ITS framework. For example, Park et al. developed a social bot companion for early literacy education [58].
They use reinforcement learning to ﬁnd an optimal policy to engage with each given student. Zhang et al.
use logic programming to facilitate the pedagogy of computer programming in the STEM subjects [59].
3.2.2
Students in an educational environment
In addition to the speciﬁc setting of learning a particular skill, the environment in which education happens
is also important. On this front, we cover two topics. First, we consider the online education platforms
which are gaining more presence. Second, we introduce the work on student’s long-term success in an
education system like high school or college.
Education on online education platforms
The advent of online education platforms such as Cours-
era and EdX brings about a new dimension of education that diﬀers from the abovementioned works.
Speciﬁcally, it has a social aspect: students interact, collaborate, and social with millions of anonymous
learners through the Internet. Strictly speaking, this is not new to education, as most people have class-
mates throughout their schooling career. Yet, the public, structured, and logged interactions allow the
AI researchers to dive deeper. For example, He et al. use the students’ online discussions in MOOCs to
measure student attributes such as attitude, ability, and intelligence [60]. In a classroom environment, this
may only be assessed by assignments and exams. A serious problem in MOOCs is student dropout. Recent
works combine graphical models with ﬁrst-order logic to analyze students’ engagement patterns [39], and
13

use logistic regression to help decide intervention on students at risk of dropout [40]. Roy et al. study the
problem of inferring pre-requisites for MOOCs [41].
Traditional classrooms have also adopted some features in MOOCs such as online discussion forums.
Kim and Shaw investigated how to organize and retrieve past discussions to help the current students
learn [61].
Student success in the education system
In addition to helping a student master a skill or a course, AI
is also a useful tool to study the student’s overall success (or failure) over an education stage. Researchers
have shown that lots of factors could be used to predict education outcomes, such as previous academic
performance, family background, and even Internet usage [62]. Xu et al. use an ensemble learning method
to predict students’ college performance continuously as the student proceeds in the program [63]. In such
predictive analysis, typical metrics like precision and recall may not be the best performance indicator of
the model. Lakkaraju et al. propose a few evaluation metrics in the context of preventing high school
dropouts [64].
3.2.3
Case study: scaﬀolding student online discussions using past discussions
Target problem
At many universities, instructors use online discussion platforms as an auxiliary tool to
facilitate collaborative learning among students. However, these platforms are often either underutilized or
fail to achieve their potential of fostering peer-to-peer interactions (only delivering the student-to-teacher
interactions). Kim and Shaw attempted to facilitate student interaction using past discussions [61, 65]. This
problem ﬁts into “environment – descriptive” in the AEC – DPP framework.
Why is AI needed
At the time of their paper [61], online discussion platforms had very few features
that directly foster their usage and usability. The authors hypothesized that, if students, when they post
a question, are presented with related discussions on the same topic from the previous iterations of the
course, such information can prompt them to reﬂect and use the discussion platform more actively. AI is
required to achieve this information retrieval task.
Intervention overview
The authors use existing information retrieval techniques like tf-idf to compute
the similarity between the student’s new post and previous posts on the platform. The most relevant previ-
ous posts are then selected to display to the student. The authors also attempted topic modeling techniques
which accommodate multi-word domain terms and acronyms as well as latent semantic analysis transfor-
mations yet they reported that these techniques did not yield satisfactory performance. The authors have
deployed the tool in three computer science courses at the University of Southern California.
Data used
The AI intervention uses message corpus from the discussion platform during the historical
oﬀerings of the same course, as well as some text from the course textbook. The AI intervention directly
selects from these data as its output. Intuitively, in the university environment, obtaining these data should
not pose signiﬁcant diﬃculty.
Resources needed
Evidently as an educational tool in a university environment, the research received
the support from the course instructor and the university. As a live system during a course oﬀering, the
researchers needed to pay close attention throughout. For example, some students mentioned that the
names were not attached to the retrieved messages so they could not identify the instructor’s response
from students’ posts. This was ﬁxed during the deployment.
14

Deployment status
The AI intervention was deployed in a computer science course for three semesters
at the University of Southern California. It reached a total of 469 students and witnessed over 2000 messages
posted on the discussion platform. In some of the semesters deployed, the tool facilitated signiﬁcantly
longer threads of discussion compared to not using the tool. Online discussion platforms have evolved
quickly since this project. Today’s similar platforms have many additional tools to facilitate collaborative
learning, yet the very function that this project explored is missing from today’s mainstream platforms.
AI in retrospect
In terms of the original motivation of the research, the AI intervention did lead to
an increased usage of discussion platforms in some experiments. However, the relevance of Pedabot’s
retrieved discussions could be improved, as commented by several students who used the system. This
perhaps hindered the further deployment of the research.
3.2.4
Other works
The AI for education community has studied the potential of AI in education for a long time and has
developed a rich literature. The interested readers could refer to the International Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence in Education13 (AIED) for more research in this community. For a survey of intelligent tutoring
systems, please refer to [54, 66].
3.3
AI for Environmental Sustainability
Agent
Descriptive
Energy usage modeling [67]
Predictive
Energy usage predictions (Forecasting Multi-Appliance Usage [68])
Prescriptive
Smart homes (Sustainable temperature tuning [69])
Environment
Descriptive
Biodiversity information gathering (Acoustic monitoring of the
African forest elephant [70])
Predictive
Climate prediction (Predicting temperature volatility [71])
Prescriptive
Wildlife protection (Defense against poaching and illegal ﬁshing [72])
Community
Descriptive
Complex ecosystem modeling (Modeling interaction between species
[73])
Predictive
Smart grid prediction (Forecasting clear skies for power grid [74])
Prescriptive
Energy distribution (Smart grid energy distribution marketplace [75])
Table 3: AEC and DPP categorization of research on AI for environmental sustainability.
The long-lasting and alarmingly novel eﬀects of human activity on Earth have been known for decades:
global temperatures have risen to unprecedented levels, amounts of ice have diminished, and species the
world over have been driven to extinction. Immediate action must be taken lest we allow the planet to
become uninhabitable for ourselves and other species, and AI can help to take such action in an informed
and eﬃcient manner. In fact, this is one of the most popular domains studied by the AI4SG community.
In Table 3, we include some sample works on AI for environmental sustainability, classifying them under
the AEC and DPP structure. We introduce the existing works on three main topics in environmental
sustainability: climate, resources, and biodiversity.
13https://iaied.org/conferences
15

3.3.1
Climate monitoring and prediction
Slowing the progress of climate change and/or mitigating its eﬀects are at the forefront of AI for sustain-
ability goals. A basic step is to use AI to monitor and predict climate and weather conditions. There is a
rich literature on predicting various climate variables, such as temperature and precipitation. A few works
approach this task as (some variants of) a LASSO problem [71, 76, 77], which is a linear regression model
with 푙1-regularization. Others leverage the connection between diﬀerent climate variables at neighbor-
ing locations to provide combined predictions [78, 79]. Gaussian process is another commonly used tool
for climate monitoring and prediction [80, 81]. Rather than using typical environment predictors, Vu and
Parker extract urban microclimates from electricity consumption data [81].
The degradation of air quality is a major threat in a number of the world’s developing regions. It has
also received rising attention from the AI community. Existing works use both Gaussian process [82] and
deep learning methods [83, 84] to monitor and predict air quality. Community sensing is an attractive
alternative to the traditional sensor-based measurement and prediction [85, 86]. For example, Zenonos
et al. propose a participatory sensing network based on local greedy search which assigns each human
participant to air pollution measurements that need to be taken [85].
3.3.2
Resource conservation
Conservation of natural resources such as water, land, air, and energy is crucial to environmental sustain-
ability, ensuring that those from all parts of the planet and future generations have the resources needed to
survive. In particular, energy conservation has received the most attention and in the sequel we introduce
the relevant works on smart home, smart grid, and electric vehicles. We also describe the works on other
resource conservation towards the end.
Smart home energy management
Firstly, modern homes are often equipped with intelligent, con-
nected devices which aid homeowners in ﬁne-tuning their households towards eﬃcient utility usage. For
example, a smart dishwasher might be able to record how much energy it has consumed in a month, and
a smart laundry unit might turn itself on during oﬀ-peak hours. Various novel applications have been
shown to eﬀectively model and predict energy usage among households [87]. Li and Zha model energy
usage behavior of singular appliances within a household using Hawkes processes [67]. Truong et al.
similarly model domestic usage of multiple appliances, taking into account habitual routines and interde-
pendence usage of diﬀerent appliances [68]. Through Safe Contextual Bayesian Optimization, Fiducioso
et al. optimize the temperature control in rooms to minimize energy consumption while maintaining in-
habitant comfort and safety [69]. Based on these results, AI applications can then make recommendations
for optimizing energy usage within singular buildings or households in an eﬃcient manner.
Smart grid
Smart home energy management plays an important role in the bigger picture of optimizing
energy distribution through a city or state at the electricity grid level. The smart grid, as the vision of
future electricity grid, features a two-way interaction between the producers and consumers in a sustain-
able, economic and secure manner [88]. For example, a smart grid can more reliably handle distributed
(consumer) energy generation, while the traditional electricity grid was designed for one-way electricity
ﬂow. On the consumer side, energy consumption ﬂuctuates greatly, and thus it is valuable to predict future
consumption in order to conserve energy and avoid incidents. A few works predict the power consumption
on a power grid [89, 90]. In particular, in the work of Salem et al. [90], a prototype was being developed
to be tested in the Norwegian state grid. On the producer side, other works formulate the energy supply
restoration problem as an optimization problem [91, 92]. Finally, it is natural to take a multi-agent system
16

perspective on the smart grid [93]. Cerquides et al. [75], for instance, proposes a model for a novel de-
centralized marketplace to trade and distribute energy in an electricity network. The market’s allocation
rule uses dynamic programming techniques and has been shown in empirical results that it outperforms
benchmark optimization problem solvers in this setting.
Electric vehicles
As electric/hybrid vehicles make their way into more people’s lives, they also received
special attention from the AI community. For example, Vogel et al. studied improving hybrid vehicle fuel
eﬃciency by predicting the driver’s route choice using inverse reinforcement learning [94]. Lots of works
have studied the placement of electric vehicle charging stations [95], and the charging mechanisms as the
current power grid is not designed for large-scale charging load [96, 97, 98]. Kahlen and Ketter consider
the two-way energy transaction between electric vehicles and electricity grid [99].
Other resource conservation
Aside from energy, water conservation has been studied from multiple
angles, such as the management of water resource systems [100], water consumption disaggregation [101],
water-eﬃcient landscape design using plant facilitation [102]. Kanters et al. use online planning to opti-
mize pumping station control in the Netherlands [103]. It is also important to note that resource conser-
vation is usually intertwined with other environmental and social indicators, and thus researchers might
ﬁnd themselves solving a multi-objective optimization problem. For example, Wu et al. developed dy-
namic programming and mixed integer programming algorithms for approximating the Pareto frontier in
the problem of hydropower dam placement in the Amazon basin [104].
3.3.3
Biodiversity
Biological diversity provides ecosystems resilience and is integral to their survival and recovery (after
incidents like natural disasters). Because humans are ultimately part of the same ecosystem as all plants
and animal species on a macroscopic scale, biodiversity beneﬁts our quality of life and reinforces our
survival as well.
Biodiversity monitoring
There are a few ways to gather information about the distribution of ani-
mals and plants, which is fundamental to conservation eﬀorts. Citizen science projects involve the general
public in the process by having people report their observations. Based on the eBird project which gath-
ers observations from the bird watchers, Hutchinson et al. model the birds’ distribution as a classiﬁcation
problem with class-conditional noise [105]. The Wildbook project uses computer vision on photos provided
by citizen scientists to identify each individual animal, and thereby providing an animal census [106]. A
few works use acoustic information to detect the presence of certain animals such as cicadas [107], ele-
phants [70], and birds [108]. These works leverage diﬀerent techniques, including hidden Markov mod-
els [107], deep neural networks [70], and unsupervised segmentation of birdsong recordings and multiple
instance classiﬁcation [108]. All above works output information about a single species. There are also a
few works that try to characterize the distributions of multiple species simultaneously [109, 110].
Habitat planning
Recognizing and managing habitats are important aspects of conservation. Zheng et
al. use generative adversarial networks (GAN) to map animal habitats in the Qinghai Lake breeding ground
in China based on remote sensing imagery [111]. A number of works have focused on the habitat planning
problems, such as using constraint programming for the partitioning of conservation areas [112] and for
the habitat restoration eﬀort [113], and using submodular optimization for sequential resource allocation
to diﬀerent habitats [114]. Faced with the increasing fragmentation of habitats, a few researchers consider
17

the connectivity of habitats in conservation eﬀorts [115, 116, 117]. These works typically formulate a
mathematical program and solve it using techniques from MIP and heuristic search.
Species conservation
Every natural ecosystem is delicately balanced by the coexisting species of plants
and animals which live in it. The endangerment and extinction of species in the wild, often due to human
activity such as poaching and deforestation, disrupts this homeostasis. Game theory is a natural tool to
model the adversarial interaction between the conservation agency and the poachers. A large body of work
on the Stackelberg security games has studied the game-theoretic model as well as been deployed in the
real world. The green security game addresses the domain of wildlife conservation [72, 118]. Its algorithm,
PAWS, has been deployed in a number of conservation sites [9]. There is also literature on security games
being applied to protecting forests [119, 120], ﬁsheries [121], and coral reefs [122].
Invasive species management
Invasive species, or species which are introduced to a new environment
where they are not native, can similarly cause ecological harm and threaten the balance of that environ-
ment’s natural ecosystem. Gupta et al. [123] intervene with the spread of invasive species by ﬁrst modeling
the spread using Hawkes processes, then deriving and optimizing closed-form expressions as an integer
program. Peron et al. use a Markov decision process (MDP) to compute the optimal intervention plan
to stop the invasive species from spreading to some location [124]. Another work takes the perspective
from using biological control agents as a countermeasure, where Spencer considers a graph vaccination
problem [125] and then solves it using submodular maximization algorithms.
3.3.4
Case study: protection assistant for wildlife security
Problem to be solved
Wildlife poaching is a great threat to the biodiversity of our planet. Because
of the high proﬁt of poaching, the poachers have become increasingly sophisticated to outsmart the pa-
trollers. Thus, it is important to design patrol routes in a strategic way. In a line of works [126, 9, 127, 128],
researchers have developed and deployed a suite of game-theoretic tool PAWS to combat poaching. This
problem falls into “community – prescriptive” under the AEC – DPP framework.
Why is AI needed
Patrollers in wildlife conservation areas have lots of experience conducting patrols.
They design the patrol routes based on their knowledge and experience in the area. However, since the
poachers are highly strategic in evading the patrollers, these patrol routes are very susceptible to gaming.
In addition, while experience can help the patrollers, it may also keep the patrollers from going to under-
explored areas where the poachings might be frequent. A game-theoretic planner for patrol routes can be
useful in addressing these issues.
Intervention overview
The authors propose PAWS (Protection Assistant for Wildlife Security), which is
based on several existing algorithms for the Stackelberg security games.14 PAWS models a two-player zero-
sum game between an attacker (the poacher) and a defender (the patroller). The authors use ML to learn
poacher’s behavior patterns from historical data. The ML methods used have gone through several stages,
from the subjective utility quantal response model [126], to dynamic Bayesian networks [118], to a variant
of decision tree ensembles [129], to a hybrid model of decision trees and Markov random ﬁelds [127], and to
Gaussian Processes [128]. Some of the works also leverage domain expert’s input, using them to augment
the dataset [130]. Solving for the equilibrium of this game through mathematical programming gives an
14For more discussion on Stackelberg security games, see Section 4.3.
18

optimal patrol strategy for the patroller [131]. Further developments provide coordinated patrol plans for
both human patrollers and conservation unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) [132], and use online learning
to design patrols to trade oﬀexploitation and exploration [133]. PAWS takes the topographic information
into account, so that the patrol routes that PAWS outputs are compatible with the terrain.
Data used
PAWS uses the animal activity data to estimate the animal density which plays a role in deter-
mining the payoﬀof each patrol route. PAWS also uses the poacher activity data to aid the poacher mod-
eling. All these data and previous patrol tracks are obtained from the collaborating conservation agency.
To consider the terrain and elevation information, PAWS also uses the topographical data.
Resources needed
The development of PAWS spans multiple years and multiple publications, and mul-
tiple researchers’ human resources. All the work which add to PAWS the bounded rationality model pre-
dictive analysis, and the incorporation of UAV planning contributed to a research product that has the
potential to wide deployment today. Throughout this work, the collaboration with conservation agencies
is key to identifying new research problems and putting the results in the ﬁeld.
Deployment status
In the series of work mentioned above, PAWS has been ﬁeld tested in multiple
conservation sites in Uganda, Cambodia, Malaysia, and China. The authors claim that PAWS proved to be
eﬀective in all these deployments, often leading the patrollers to patrol routes never used before but discov-
ering poacher activities on those routes. The initial eﬀort for commercialization did not prove successful.15
Nevertheless, the development of PAWS did not stop with these papers. In 2019, PAWS started the part-
nership with SMART16 (a spatial monitoring and reporting tool commonly used by wildlife rangers) and
Microsoft. This partnership will allow PAWS to be used at over 800 wildlife conservation sites worldwide
in the near future.
AI in retrospect
The initial version of PAWS did not take the terrain and elevation into account when
designing patrol routes. The collaborating conservation agency invited the authors to go for a patrol
themselves to experience in person the impact of terrain and elevation. The authors then successfully
addressed this issue by explicitly using “feasible routes” in the security game model.
3.3.5
Other works
A recent article by Gomes et al. contains an overview of the research eﬀorts in computational sustainabil-
ity [134], which is more general than the environmental sustainability we covered in this section and has
some overlapping with our other sections.
3.4
AI for Healthcare
According to the World Health Organization, the state of global health has been generally on the rise.
However, there remain areas of improvement, e.g. infant mortality or global healthcare, for which further
developments will enhance human well-being. AI has incredible potential in the medical domain, and we
believe that a great amount of work has already been done. We showcase some example works in Table 4,
categorized with the AEC and DPP structure. In this subsection we discuss how AI has augmented the
many sides of both clinical health and public health.
15AMOURWAY (now named Avata AI). https://www.avata.ai/
16https://smartconservationtools.org/
19

Agent
Descriptive
Disease diagnosis (Automated glaucoma diagnosis [135])
Predictive
Disease development predictions (Early prediction of diabetes
complications [136])
Prescriptive
Treatment recommendation (Adaptive epilepsy treatment [137])
Environment
Descriptive
Drug development (Drug similarity integration [138])
Predictive
Epidemic prediction (Surveillance on epidemic dynamics [139])
Prescriptive
Preventing spread of illness (Preventing foodborne illness [140])
Community
Descriptive
Patient subtyping [141]
Predictive
Predictive phenotyping [142]
Prescriptive
Transplant matching [143]
Table 4: AEC and DPP Categorization of research on AI for healthcare.
3.4.1
Clinical health
The majority of research eﬀorts in AI for healthcare are focused on clinical health. The wide availability
of electronic health records (EHR) and medical images have directly facilitated the AI research in disease
diagnosis, clinical treatment, and clinical prediction. We also survey a few other specialty areas to which
AI has made signiﬁcant contributions, including hospital management, organ transplant matching, drug
development, mental health, and well-being.
Disease diagnosis
Disease diagnosis is the topic in healthcare that has seen the most applications of
AI. Recent advances in the image processing capabilities of deep learning methods are readily applicable
to medical images such as radiology results. Researchers have used X-ray, MRI, and CT images for the
diagnosis of brain disease [144, 145] like Alzheimer’s Disease [146, 147, 148], prostate disease [149, 150],
and various types of cancer [151]. Several new problems accompany these advances. Irvin et al. propose a
chest radiograph dataset with expert comparison [152], since despite the seemingly abundant data, well-
curated realistic datasets are still a craving of the researchers. Chen et al. address the domain adaptation
problem which is common in medical treatment, for example, when a classiﬁer trained for MRI image is
used for CT image [153].
Besides radiology images, AI, in particular CV, can assist in diagnosis through several other means,
such as electrocardiograms [154, 155, 156], retinal imaging [157, 158, 159, 160, 161], and staining [162].
In addition to using AI for disease diagnosis, there is also work which uses hierarchical probabilis-
tic models to better understand physicians’ diagnostic decision-making and reduce misdiagnoses in the
clinical setting [163].
Clinical treatment
Treatment recommendations for various diseases and conditions have also been
made readily available by AI. At the most micro level is medication prescription. Shang et al. utilize graph
neural networks (GNN) and Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT), which is
a state-of-the-art NLP pre-training model, to make medication recommendations [164]. Dual to medicine
is the important problem of prescription surveillance. The misuse of antibiotics, for example, has become
a severe problem worldwide. Beaudoin et al. design a prescription surveillance system that has been de-
ployed at the Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Sherbrooke [165]. Going one level up, treatment protocols
often include multiple steps, for which reinforcement learning becomes a natural tool. Guez et al. use ﬁt-
ted Q-iteration and randomized tree techniques to optimize deep-brain stimulation strategies for reducing
seizure frequency and duration [137]. There have been attempts to steer immune system adaptation using
20

Monte Carlo Tree Search [166], and to control propofol anesthesia using Q-learning [167]. Often in the
treatment procedure, doctors order repeated clinical laboratory tests, but the timing and number of these
tests are often open to personal judgement. This has also received some attention recently [168].
The use of AI in clinical treatment also encompasses treatment preparation. IBM develops a tool to au-
tomatically generate a list of the patient’s medical problems from historical EHR using NLP methods [169].
New treatment protocols must be tested extensively before being used on patients. Arandjelovic uses statis-
tical inference methods to adaptively reduce the time needed for the trials by sample size adjustment [170],
so that eﬀective protocols can be used in practice sooner.
Also important in clinical treatment is counterfactual reasoning. When choosing between several treat-
ment protocols based on historical data, we often want to know how each treatment would have worked
on each individual. Since these data are typically unavailable, it is necessary to use causal inference to
estimate the treatment eﬀects. There is a rich literature on this topic [171, 172, 173]. For example, Has-
sanpour and Greiner propose an importance sampling re-weighing scheme with a representation learning
model to estimate the individual treatment eﬀects [174]. In the work of Atan et al., the proposed algorithm
ﬁrst learns an auto-encoder network to remove the bias in the original data, and then use another neural
network to learn the optimal treatment policy [175].
Clinical prediction
Being able to predict clinical events can greatly assist the treatment of patients and
improve operation eﬃciency in practice. Such prediction is made possible by the availability of EHR. The
tasks in this direction can be roughly divided into diagnosis and disease progression prediction [176, 177]
and patient subtyping. The problem is often formulated as sequential prediction on EHR data and the
recently proposed approaches often involve some type of recurrent neural networks (RNN).
Diagnosis prediction might improve the quality of medical procedures [178]. This is also similar to the
prediction of disease progression. The RETAIN model aims to build an interpretable RNN model which
resembles the way human doctors using EHR to make diagnosis [179]. Ma et al. use attention mech-
anisms to leverage the relationship between multiple visits and diagnosis prediction [180]. Qiao et al.
incorporate textual data such as clinical notes for diagnosis prediction using multimodal attentional neu-
ral networks [181]. Esteban et al. study the clinical endpoint of kidney transplantation and use RNN to
predict if the kidney will be rejected or the patient will die [182]. Fu et al. use dictionary learning to make
use of both labeled data and unlabeled data [142]. Choi et al. also predict the time duration to the next
visit [183].
Patient subtyping attempts to group patients with similar disease progression together, so that a more
personalized treatment plan can be carried out. Baytas et al. propose a time-aware long short-term memory
(LSTM) network to address the heterogeneity of time intervals in patients’ EHR data [141].
Hospital management
There are a lot of operational challenges in hospital management that AI can
help to address. For example, Rosemarin et al. propose an online deep learning-based scheduling algorithm
for matching caregivers to patients in the emergency department [184]. Also in the emergency department
setting, recent work used MIP to optimize the ambulance allocation [185]. As a routine practice, hospitals
need to maintain an inventory of medical supplies and often need to share these supplies among them
during large outbreaks. Researchers have used game-theoretic models to reason about the best sharing
strategies [186].
Transplant matching
The compatibility of donors and recipients in organ transplant procedures is cru-
cial to the survival of patients and success of the operation, and recent data-driven approaches have helped
21

to assess this compatibility and make transplant matching recommendations. Yoon et al. propose a classi-
ﬁcation algorithm called ConﬁdentMatch [143], which predicts organ transplant success based on clinical
and demographic traits of donor and recipient, ConﬁdentMatch divides the feature space into clusters and
train classiﬁers for each cluster. It was shown to surpass benchmark algorithms by several hundred patients
in predicting transplant success.
When a patient needs an organ transplant, a donation from their relatives is sometimes the easiest
option. However, the relatives often ﬁnd themselves unable to do it due to incompatibility. This gives rise to
the popularity of organ exchange platforms, where a patient and their incompatible donor can be matched
with another patient-donor pair, if one patient’s donor happens to be compatible with the other patient
and vice versa. Although such matching problem has been studied in economics for a long time [187, 188],
national-level matching was practically infeasible until the work of Abraham et al. [189], whose algorithm
was tested at the Alliance for Paired Donation, one of the leading kidney exchanges. This research spurred
a series of works on the computational aspects of organ matching markets (e.g., [190, 191]). They have led
to more eﬃcient algorithms deployed on the kidney exchange platform at the United Network for Organ
Sharing, which manages a US national organ transplant system that includes 69% of the transplant centers
in the country.
Drug development
AI can be used to model the chemical interactions and properties relating to drug
intake, which ultimately contributes to the development of new drugs that aid the general public. [138]
utilizes multi-view graph auto-encoders to learn similarity measures between diﬀerent drugs. This is useful
for inferring novel drug properties like side eﬀects and interactions. In addition, both adverse reactions
and adverse drug-drug interactions have been more explicitly studied [192, 193], using latent Dirichlet
allocation and multitask regression, respectively. Drug repurposing, a popular technique, aims to ﬁnd new
functions of existing drugs, which is sometimes more cost-eﬃcient than developing new drugs. Leveraging
EHR and biomedical knowledge, some works discover drug families which were previously unknown for
the target disease using knowledge graphs or solving LASSO problems [194, 195].
Mental health
The importance of one’s mental health on their physiology and general well-being has
recently come to the forefront of medical focus. Various new AI applications bring similar techniques ap-
plied to other components of human health and physiology to mental aﬄictions and treatments, which
were previously understudied. Chung et al. encode the ﬁxation sequences captured from the visual scan-
ning of patient’s faces, and use LSTM on them to diﬀerentiate bipolar and unipolar patients [196]. Brown
et al. propose a sparse combined regression and classiﬁcation formulation for Post-Traumatic Stress Dis-
order diagnosis based on peripheral physiology [197]. More generally, there have been eﬀorts to predict
suicide risk based on medical history using a set of ordinal classiﬁers [198] and to detect depression from
social media posts using multimodal dictionary learning and transfer learning [199, 200] and mobile phone
usage [201].
Well-being
In today’s fast-paced society, fatigue and other chronic symptoms are growing more and
more common, even though these may not be clinically treatable symptoms. AI can also help in promoting
the general well-being of the population. For example, a few works study and predict the sleep quality and
sleepiness from daily logs and respiratory information using oﬀ-the-shelf classiﬁers as well as LSTMs [202,
203]. Aggarwal et al. use an unsupervised representation learning technique on daily physical activity and
sleep patterns to predict health disorders [204].
22

3.4.2
Public health
Public health is an important component of the healthcare system, which concerns itself with the disease
prevention and health promotion of the whole community. Although it has a much wider deﬁnition, in
this survey we focus on the epidemics monitoring, forecasting, and control, which have received the most
attention from the AI community.
Epidemics monitoring
Dealing with epidemics is a top challenge in public health. The very ﬁrst step is
often the surveillance of epidemics, which lays the foundation for other tasks. Pei et al. propose an active
surveillance method that actively selects areas to monitor in order to deal with the limited resources in
practice [139]. Being able to detect disease outbreaks can often save enormous eﬀorts and resources of the
public health authority. For example, Sadilek et al. mine Twitter data and use support vector machines
(SVM) to detect events that may pose a public health hazard such as venues that lack permits or have
contagious kitchen staﬀin an attempt to reduce foodborne illness [140]. The system was deployed in Las
Vegas. A follow-up work uses a similar supervised classiﬁer on Google search history to identify potential
users with foodborne illness and the source of the problem [205].
Epidemics forecasting
Assuming such data, the decision-maker might wish to predict the spread of
the disease. A few works directly consider this as time series prediction, which uses the previous states of
epidemics to predict the future [206, 207, 208]. Other works use network epidemiology models to explicitly
reason about the spread of disease across a social network, or an abstraction of a social network [209, 210].
Epidemics control
The epidemics control problem is frequently studied as the allocation of scarce re-
sources, which reﬂects the unfortunate fact of the general lack of funding in the public health domain. A
few works study how to counter epidemics by intelligently choosing some network nodes to protect [211].
Some other works, such as that of Yadav et al. develop strategies to selectively educate homeless youth in
Los Angeles to spread HIV-related information in order to reduce the risk of HIV infection [10]. In another
work, Killian et al. focus on the drug adherence problem in tuberculosis control in India [212]. Healthcare
providers need to follow up with patients to make sure they adhere to the medication. Since the human
resource is relatively scarce compared to the patient population, it is important to prioritize intervention
to the “riskiest” patients, which Killian et al. attempt to do using an end-to-end decision-focused learning
algorithm.
3.4.3
Case study: raising awareness about HIV among homeless youth
Target problem
HIV brings a serious threat to public health. Homeless youth is a population particu-
larly susceptible to HIV spread because of injection drugs and unsafe sexual activities. Therefore, raising
awareness about HIV among homeless youth is a pressing problem. A few recent works [10, 213] used
techniques from sequential decision making and inﬂuence maximization to raise the awareness of HIV
prevention among homeless youth. This problem falls into “community – prescriptive” under the AEC –
DPP framework.
Why is AI needed
Community service providers routinely launch “peer leader” programs to teach se-
lected youth about HIV prevention, hoping that these peer leaders will spread the information to other
homeless youth. Since these programs are constrained by funding and human resources and cannot eﬀec-
tively reach out to every homeless youth, it is important to select the “right” set of peer leaders. In practice,
23

service providers use degree centrality which essentially selects the most popular youth. However, this
is not necessarily the best selection method. The AI intervention can directly optimize the information
spread.
Intervention overview
The authors formulate a planning problem in terms of a partially observable
MDP (POMDP), with the goal of inﬂuence maximization on a social network. Since the existing POMDP
solvers do not scale to the size of the problem, Yadav et al. propose a hierarchical approach which de-
compose the POMDP into smaller ones. They solve these smaller POMDPs using Tree Aggregation for
Sequential Planning which is based on a variant of the UCT algorithm (Upper Conﬁdence Bounds applied
to Trees) and then aggregate the results [213]. At each time step, the planning algorithm selects a small
set of homeless youth as the “peer leader” who will participate in the program at the service provider.
Data used
The key parameters in this application are the social network connectivity, i.e. which home-
less youths are friends with each other. This information was gathered in two ways. First, the authors de-
veloped a Facebook application which parses the youth’s Facebook contact list to determine the friendship
status. The authors also relied on the reports from the collaborating service partner who does interviews
with the homeless youths.
Resources needed
The authors collaborated with the homeless youth service providers, who are central
to the success of the pilot study, as they recruited the youth and implemented the program for the peer lead-
ers. Working with social work researchers also provides the necessary context and skills to communicate
with the service providers and the youth.
Deployment status
Starting in the spring of 2016, the authors launched three pilot studies in Los An-
geles for a seven-month period, involving 173 homeless youths. The experiment compared two AI algo-
rithms [213, 214] and the current practice. The result of the pilot studies showed that the AI interventions
achieved 184% more HIV prevention information spread than the current practice, and are also signiﬁ-
cantly better than the current practice in inducing behavioral changes in homeless youth. This suggests
the great promise of future deployment. That said, we were not able to ﬁnd any public information about
their continued deployment.
AI in retrospect
The pilot study illustrates that the AI intervention eﬀectively improves the spread of
HIV awareness over the current practice. A prominent reason is that the AI algorithm can capture more
global information in the network while the current practice is a greedy approach which leads to more
redundant eﬀorts. However, the study also showed that the AI algorithm has to be ﬂexible enough to deal
with the frequent incidents in human studies. If the AI algorithm outputs a certain youth to be the peer
leader yet that youth was not able to show up to the program, then the algorithm needs to generate an
alternative plan. The authors ﬁrst address this problem by using heuristic solutions [213]. This problem,
along with the uncertainty of social network, is more systematically addressed in the follow-up work [214].
3.4.4
Other works
The reader is referred to the survey by Yu et al. for an overview of the AI for clinical health outside the
major AI literature [215].
24

3.5
AI for Combating Information Manipulation
Agent
Descriptive
Personalized sentiment analysis (Emotion inference from social
media [216])
Predictive
Link prediction with personalized social inﬂuence [217]
Prescriptive
Trustworthiness evaluation [218]
Environment
Descriptive
Political ideology detection [219]
Predictive
Misinformation prediction [220]
Prescriptive
Improving robustness of trust systems [221]
Community
Descriptive
Modeling planned protest [222]
Predictive
Blame detection [223]
Prescriptive
Coverage Centrality Maximization in Undirected Networks [224]
Table 5: AEC and DPP categorization of research on AI for combating information manipulation.
Combating information manipulation has become a prominent issue in recent years with the rise of
new media channels. AI can play a signiﬁcant role in ensuring that citizens around the world are utilizing
trustworthy information and preventing systematic dispersion of false news. We believe there is much
work to be done in this domain. We show several example works according to the AEC and DPP structure
in Table 5. In this subsection, we discuss the works on two major challenges to information validation:
misinformation and fraud.
3.5.1
Combating misinformation
Much of AI for combating information manipulation aims at spreading awareness of misleading informa-
tion. This has become an increasingly prominent issue in browsing the web in recent years, with the rise
of fake news and the creation of potentially malicious technologies like Deepfakes. In the sequel, we ﬁrst
discuss the misinformation detection which has been the center of attention in the literature. We also in-
troduce the research on clickbait detection as a specialized topic and the detection of social bots which are
an important means of fake news campaigns.
Misinformation detection
As a preventative measure against the spread of false information on the
Internet, the ﬁrst step is to detect its presence on pages like news channels and social media platforms.
Since the seminal work of Castillo et al. on the information credibility on Twitter [225], social media
rumor detection has received wide attention from the literature [226, 227, 228], leveraging classiﬁers like
decision tree, SVM, and random forest. Recent works [229, 220, 230] use RNNs and convolutional neural
networks (CNN) to automatically extract key features from social media posts to identify misinformation,
and have achieved practical early detection of misinformation in experimental results on large datasets
from Twitter and Weibo. These works typically rely on the dynamics of the social media posts, such as the
post’s popularity, the source’s credibility, and the timing of retweets, to perform classiﬁcation.
In the natural language processing community, lots of works focus on analyzing the text of the fake
news itself [231], with well-received public benchmark datasets [232, 233]. The CSI model proposed by
Ruchansky et al., which consists of three modules Capture, Score, and Integrate, combines network features
and textual features to detect fake news [234]. In a recent work, Zellers et al. present a system which can
generate fake news which appears more credible than human-written news using deep neural network-
25

based language models [235]. Their system can also detect fake news with higher accuracy than other
existing classiﬁers.
Clickbait headlines
Another type of misinformation is clickbait headlines, which attract the reader’s
attention with exaggerated or false information. There have been a few attempts to detect clickbait head-
lines [236, 237, 238]. Yoon et al. use a deep hierarchical encoder to detect incongruity between the news
headline and the body text [239]. Liu et al. use a neural matching model to explain ambiguous headlines
of online news [240].
Bot detection
Of particular signiﬁcance in the disinformation campaigns is social bots. These are social
media accounts managed by algorithms that automatically post or re-post information. In the hands of
disinformation campaigners, these bots are a powerful tool to spread and reinforce the distorted informa-
tion. Detecting such bots has been a popular topic in AI research recently [241, 242]. As we will study in
Section 3.5.3, Varol et al. developed the ﬁrst public bot detection tool based on classiﬁcation algorithms
with carefully engineered features [243, 244]. Diﬀerent from these supervised approaches, Chavoshi et al.
use a warped correlation ﬁnder to detect bot accounts that have correlated activities [245].
3.5.2
Combating fraud
In addition to fake news, AI has also been applied to detect misleading or dishonest information, also
known as fraud detection. We review two most notable forms of fraud: reputation fraud and ﬁnancial
fraud.
Reputation fraud
Reputation fraud aims to distort the public opinion on some targets such as goods and
services. It usually takes the form of posting online malicious ratings, reviews, and knowledgebase entries.
It is also related to the shilling attacks in recommender systems [246], and trustworthiness evaluation [247].
The initial attempt by Jindal and Liu [248], who used logistic regression to detect spam reviews, spurred
a ﬂurry of works on reputation fraud detection. The ﬁrst line of work relies on the textual review to
classify malicious reviews. For example, Ott et al. use naive Bayes and SVM to ﬁnd deceptive opinion
spams [249]. Another approach classiﬁes spam information based on the user’s historical behavior, e.g.
previous reviews, trajectories, and average ratings [248, 250, 251], using similar oﬀ-the-shelf classiﬁers as
well as techniques like learning to rank [252]. Some works combine the two approaches [253]. Mukherjee
et al. investigate the spam review detector on Yelp with the aforementioned learning algorithms, and
discover that the implementation is closer to the latter approach [254]. Finally, a third approach is to
detect fake reviews based on the interactions among reviewers as well as the review objects [255, 256]
using techniques from topics such as graph mining and probabilistic graphical models. For example, Xu
et al. use online learning to detect reputation fraud campaigns and characterize the interactions between
the campaigned spammers [257]. Rayana and Leman combine the three approaches together in a uniﬁed
framework to detect suspicious users and reviews using inference methods on graphical models [258].
Financial fraud
Financial fraud is the dishonest and covert attempt to escape the oversight of law or
other regulations in the pursuit of monetary gains. There have been existing works to ﬁght against busi-
ness procurement fraud using a number of techniques from NLP, social network analysis and online learn-
ing [259], real money trading in online games using multi-view attention networks [260], and cash-out
detection in ﬁnancial services using neural networks with hierarchical attention mechanism [261]. Some
of these have even been deployed [259, 260]. In healthcare, fraud in insurance claims has been a central
26

topic for years. Chandola et al. use methods from topic modeling, social network analysis, and statisti-
cal process control to classify fraudulent claims [262]. A graph-based approach for detecting healthcare
fraud has been put into use [263]. Recent work exploits the temporal nature of fraud identiﬁcation, which,
combined with human-engineered features, yields a high rate of fraud detection [264].
3.5.3
Case study: detecting social bots on Twitter
Target problem
Social networking platforms have become a main news and information source for
many users. Some users, however, abuse these platforms to spread misinformation in accordance with some
potentially malicious agenda. A subset of such users create automated or “bot” accounts that automatically
post content and form false social relationships. This produces an exigence for automated detection of
social media bots, which is crucial to helping the general public make more informed decisions about
which information sources to trust. One such tool is Botometer, which was introduced and developed in a
number of works [265, 243, 266]. This problem falls into “community – descriptive” under the AEC – DPP
framework.
Why is AI needed
Prior to the existence of the authors’ solution, Botometer, the standard approach to
detection of malicious bots on social media platforms was manual validation from either the platform’s
users or administrators. Botometer reduces the amount of manual inspection required of human users in
analyzing Twitter posts, and signiﬁcantly out-scales the manual approach in terms of accuracy.
Intervention overview
Botometer, ﬁrst gathers data from the social media site Twitter via its public
API. It then extracts over one thousand features relating to the user in question’s account, friends, network,
content, and sentiment. Botometer ﬁnally employs a random forest classiﬁer model trained on a public
dataset (a subset of which is manually annotated as human or bot) with thousands of veriﬁed bot accounts,
their posted tweets, and tweets mentioning them. The classiﬁer outputs a probability value representing
how likely the given account is a bot.
Public usage of the deployed application involves inputting the screen name of a speciﬁc Twitter user,
and the system subsequently outputs a bot likelihood score for that account. This is all done by interacting
with their web application at https://botometer.iuni.iu.edu.
Data used
Gathering of Twitter data is the lifeblood of this project. As such, Botometer collects tweets on
14 million user accounts satisfying a certain activity threshold, relying on the Twitter Search API. Twitter
user datasets give the authors current predictions about the percentage of active Twitter accounts which
are bots, as well as the interactions between bots with other accounts (whether human or bot).
Resources needed
During the Botometer classiﬁer’s training process, the authors utilized an annotated
dataset created by four volunteers who manually assessed the bot status of each user in a subset of the
original dataset of users. Other than this, the project’s implementation and maintenance are fairly self-
contained, mainly relying upon the Twitter API.
Deployment status
Since its release in 2014, Botometer has been open to public use and is now avail-
able at the aforementioned site. The authors report that the tool serves hundreds of thousand requests
daily [267]. Due to its automated nature and method of usage, the current tool does not require signiﬁcant
maintenance of the authors. However, the authors are still developing and improving upon the Botome-
ter classiﬁer, and users of the application can continuously provide feedback for the system regarding the
27

accuracy of speciﬁc classiﬁcations. The tool is also used in other projects such as Hoaxy17, a visualization
and fact-checking website.
AI in retrospect
The AI intervention in general was quite accurate, achieving strong consistency with
the manually validated dataset. However, some aspects of Botometer’s classiﬁcation were not so successful.
For instance, some Twitter accounts are run by both human and automated software. In these boundary
cases exhibiting behaviors of both human and bot activity, it was more diﬃcult for Botometer to accurately
and conﬁdently predict whether the account is a bot or not. Another area of weakness of the AI intervention
was its susceptibility to false positive classiﬁcations. For instance, Botometer tended to classify human
accounts who post frequently from externally connected applications, or in multiple languages as bots. To
tackle the latter case, the authors modiﬁed the classiﬁer to ignore language-dependent features.
3.5.4
Other works
The reader may refer to the work of West and Bhattacharya for a survey of AI in fraud detection [268].
3.6
AI for Social Care and Urban Planning
Agent
Descriptive
Informing citizens (Increasing ﬁnancial literacy among Bangalore
drivers [269])
Predictive
Prescriptive
Public service allocation to individuals (SMS public forum platform
[270])
Environment
Descriptive
Poverty mapping [271]
Predictive
Disaster forecasting (Severe hail prediction [272])
Prescriptive
Public infrastructure improvement (Optimizing water pipe
maintenance [273])
Community
Descriptive
Urban statistic collection (Urban resident recognition to study
migration [274])
Predictive
Inference of social ties (Learning social structure of hidden
populations [275])
Prescriptive
Public service optimization (Improving homelessness services
allocation [276])
Table 6: AEC and DPP categorization of research on AI for social care and urban planning.
Social care and urban planning provide the services and infrastructure that citizens around the globe
rely on in a functioning and supportive community. Unfortunately, these public sectors are sometimes
restricted in their resources, rendering their residents unprepared for daily life and work. AI is a promis-
ing tool to intelligently save or allocate the scarce program resources, e.g. helping put an end to such
humanitarian crises as the Flint water crisis, or providing more wide-reaching rehabilitation services to
the homeless. Table 6 shows several sample works on AI for social care and urban planning, categorized
using the AEC and DPP structure. In this subsection, we outline two major areas – public services and
crisis management – which have been improved with the application of AI.
17https://hoaxy.iuni.iu.edu/
28

3.6.1
Public services
A primary goal of AI for social care and urban planning is the provision of adequate public services for
members of a community. Most of the existing works in the AI community can be grouped into the follow-
ing three categories: collecting urban data for urban planning, optimizing public infrastructure in major
metropolitan areas, as well as establishing more basic services to underserved communities.
Urban data collection
Urban planners must gather various statistics on the community they are serv-
ing, to better infer how to improve the lives of community members. The wealth of data aﬀords city
planners with a wide variety of possibilities. For example, check-in locations on social media and online
map search queries are useful for identifying points of interest and planning urban planning and invest-
ments [277, 278]. Data are also helping cities pay more attention to the neighborhoods that need it the
most [279]. Recent work in urban data collection aims at gathering more unbiased data, and extracting
more useful information from smaller amounts of data (e.g., avoiding usage of tools like CCTV in favor of
satellite imagery). Xie et al., for instance, utilize transfer learning to extract features from satellite imagery
which can predict poverty, aggregating poverty data in developing countries [271]. Transfer learning is
also useful when the target city’s service or infrastructure is just built but abundant data are available at
similar cities [280]. [274] attempts to model migration patterns via a cross-domain deep learning model.
Infrastructure optimization
The design and maintenance of urban infrastructure are a main function-
ality of city governance. In the AI literature, partly due to the availability of systematic records and data,
there have been some works concerning water consumption and provision [281, 282]. Yan et al. aim to
optimize water pipe replacement and rehabilitation by examining more novel approaches using binary
classiﬁers and self-exciting stochastic processes for predicting water pipe failure [273]. The Flint water
crisis is a well-known problem in the US. Some attempt to use data science to understand the water con-
tamination in Flint [283]. In the case study of this section, we will detail the subsequent eﬀort of replacing
the water pipes in Flint [8].
Social work
On top of infrastructure, public workers are also interested in the optimal allocation of
public resources and the provision of such services to underserved populations. Predictive modeling is a
major technique used by the literature along this line. Existing works span from using ML models such as
gradient boosting to help vulnerable renters [284], to combining learning with integer programming for
peer-to-peer rental recommendation [285] to modeling population migration with XGBoost and neural
networks [286] to using random forests to predict a poverty heat map which guides cash transfer cam-
paigns for poverty relief [287]. In a recent work of Kube et al., the authors attempt to choose the optimal
allocation of various homelessness services using counterfactual inference, and speciﬁcally Bayesian ad-
ditive regression trees [276].
A speciﬁc topic that has received much attention is food insecurity, which has its presence in the least
developed regions as well as the wealthiest countries. Optimizing the eﬃciency and fairness of food bank
and food rescue operations is a step towards mitigating this issue. Shi et al. use predictive modeling such
as the stacking model to predict the success or failure of a food rescue, and use data-driven optimization
to improve the operation of a food rescue organization in Pittsburgh, US [288]. Aleksandrov et al., in
collaboration with a food bank in Australia, propose two online fair division mechanisms which address
how food bank might allocate the received food to charities [289]. Silvis et al. developed a mobile app that
uses reinforcement learning to select users to invite to events that have leftover food [290].
29

3.6.2
Crisis management
In addition to public services, citizens in urban environments also rely on their community’s general pre-
paredness for crises, such as natural disasters. We introduce the research eﬀorts in two major directions:
disaster forecasting and disaster response.
Disaster forecasting
The ﬁrst step toward preparedness is predicting when natural disasters may strike.
For example, Gagne et al. [272] use standard machine learning models like gradient boosting trees and
linear regression to predict upcoming hail storms and their sizes. Chen et al [291] focus on the problem
of hurricane prediction. Radke et al. [292] use CNN to predict the spread of wildﬁre. Disaster forecasting
is typically studied as extreme or rare event prediction in the literature [293, 291]. In this front, Ding et
al. [293] improve the prediction performance of deep neural networks by using a novel loss function called
the extreme value loss. [294] makes use of NLP techniques to mine Twitter feeds real-time as a source of
sensor data, to predict the occurrence of earthquakes.
Disaster response
Preparing measures such as search, rescue, and evacuation in response to the in-
evitable occurrence of disasters is equally important as being prepared for when they strike. With the
forecasting mentioned above, governments can plan for evacuation by solving a graph ﬂow problem [295].
This is often coupled with the preparation in transportation infrastructure network about which link to en-
hance, solved as a stochastic optimization problem [296, 297] or using Benders decomposition [298]. This
is also related to how to dispatch emergency response vehicles, as studied by Ghosh and Varakantham
using a mathematical programming approach [299].
Such planning often relies on the information about the emergency situation and human mobility
following the disaster. As the very ﬁrst step, the decision-maker requires immediate knowledge of the
mere occurrence of the disaster. Avvenuti et al. use NLP techniques to mine Twitter feeds in real-time as
a source of sensor data, to detect the occurrence of earthquakes [294]. Second, another important piece
of information is damage estimation. Rudner et al. propose a novel CNN-based approach to use satellite
images to detect and segment aﬀected buildings after ﬂooding [300]. Third, human mobility data is crucial
to public management. Leveraging data from the global positioning system, Song et al. simulate the human
mobility pattern following large disasters such as earthquakes in Japan [301, 302]. Parikh et al. model the
human behavior after a nuclear detonation [303].
Recently, the use of UAVs has become more commonplace in a number of social service sectors. In
disaster response, UAVs can be programmed to collect information about an unknown environment [304],
and collaborate with and crowdsource from humans to guide their actions [305]. Advancing from the full
information scenario, Wu et al. [306] model the problem of coordinating human-UAV teams in disaster
response as a POMDP, which integrates information gathering with task planning to guide both humans
and UAVs in disaster response.
3.6.3
Case study: the search for lead pipes in Flint, Michigan
Target problem
The water crisis in Flint, Michigan is a widely known man-made urban disaster that
has hit the headlines since 2015. Throughout the city of Flint, the lead water pipes suﬀered from corrosion,
which led to the contamination of drinking water and serious public health issue. The city decided to
replace the aﬀected lead water pipes. A group of researchers at the University of Michigan used predictive
modeling and active learning methods to guide the replacement procedure [283, 8]. This problem falls into
“community – prescriptive” under the AEC – DPP framework.
30

Why is AI needed
The default option is to inspect each household’s water pipes and replace them if
needed. However, such inspection, by digging into the ground, requires too much funding if carried out on
all housings in the city. Meanwhile, it is also desired that the housings with unaﬀected water pipes never
get inspected, because they do not require replacement and thus the inspection cost is wasted. Therefore,
it is important to identify the “high-risk” housings in advance so that the limited budget can be applied to
the housings that need it the most. This is the goal of the authors’ AI intervention.
Intervention overview
The authors ﬁrst build a predictive model which, given certain features of the
household, predicts the likelihood that this household has contaminated water pipes. This predictive model
consists of an XGBoost classiﬁer and a hierarchical Bayesian model. The latter is a relatively novel com-
ponent which resolves the dilemma that each region in Flint has diﬀerent amount of information. The
Bayesian model allows the authors to leverage the data from all regions and makes the result of regions
with less information closer to the city average.
Based on this predictive model, the authors develop an active learning framework to guide which house-
hold should be inspected in a sequential fashion. The algorithm is a variant of the importance weighted
active learning, which adaptively samples data from regions with high uncertainty and incorporates the
acquired data into the predictive model.
Data used
In this project, the quantity and quality of data are essential to the result of the AI intervention.
Both of them posed a signiﬁcant challenge and the authors took initiative to address this challenge. The
predictive model needs the water pipe status of as many households as possible, yet at the beginning the
authors only have 250 data points from the city of Flint. One reason for such scant data is that other data
sources proved to be unreliable. Even the 250 available data points are not sampled (nearly) randomly. The
authors worked with the city to use a cheaper method of collecting data, which entails working with other
contractors in a way that the authors can have autonomy in which data points to collect.
Resources needed
The authors worked closely with the city government, the various contractors who
do the actual work of replacing pipes, and researchers in related domains. The authors also made techni-
cal eﬀorts to facilitate the collaboration. For example, they developed a mobile and web app to help the
contractors log the data.
Deployment status
The proposed AI-enhanced replacement plan was adopted by the city of Flint, and
was successful. As reported by Madrigal, in 2007 the city of Flint inspected 8833 homes and replaced the
pipes of 6228 of them, which means the algorithm achieved an impressive 70% accuracy in practice [307].
There have been some setbacks after the AI intervention’s initial success in 2016 - 2017. However, the
setbacks were largely due to factors beyond the researchers’ control. Fortunately, the AI intervention is
back to running in 2019. The reader can refer to the piece by Madrigal [307] for more detailed information.
AI in retrospect
The accuracy of the predictive model validated in the deployment during 2016 - 2017.
In addition, the low performance of an alternative brute force method that the city of Flint used in 2018
further corroborated the eﬃcacy of the AI intervention. However, one reason of the setback in 2018 is that
the selective inspection caused confusion in the neighborhood: “you did my neighbor’s pipe but didn’t do
mine, why is that?” The AI intervention could have considered making the algorithm more explainable to
address the issue regarding the perception of fairness.
31

3.7
AI for Public Safety
Agent
Descriptive
Predictive
Identifying risk for police oﬃcers [308]
Prescriptive
Environment
Descriptive
Predictive
Crime network prediction (Predicting oﬀender networks [309])
Prescriptive
Improving law enforcement deployment [310]
Community
Descriptive
Investigation datasets (Hotel recognition dataset for traﬃcking
investigations [311])
Predictive
Crime detection (Detecting pickpocketing suspects [312])
Prescriptive
Violence reduction [313]
Table 7: AEC and DPP categorization of research on AI for public safety.
With criminals becoming increasingly sophisticated and crimes still prevalent in many regions around
the world [314], public safety poses a major challenge for the modern society. Thus, there is an urgent
need to improve the eﬃcacy and trustworthiness of law enforcement systems, for which AI could be part
of the solution. As shown in Table 7, the research eﬀorts on AI for public safety have mostly focused on
the environment and community categories. According to whether the AI intervention is facing the public,
criminals, or itself, we cluster the existing works into three topics: crime and event detection, combating
crimes, and improving law enforcement operations.
3.7.1
Crime and event detection
Public surveillance as a law enforcement approach is embroiled in controversy. We share a lot of concerns
about it, but as we mentioned in the introduction, we focus on its use in good hands. The person re-
identiﬁcation problem, that is, matching the images of the same person in diﬀerent settings has received
much attention from the vision community [315, 316, 317]. Albanese et al. consider ﬁnding unexplained
events in the video [318]. Crowd prediction is closely related to public surveillance and has important
implications to transportation and urban planning in addition to public safety. Most works use CNN-based
architecture to capture the spatial relationship. As for the temporal dependency, some directly use a mixed
architecture of CNN and RNN [319], while others attempt to encode temporal information in the input to
the pure convolutional network [320, 321] because a mixed architecture is typically diﬃcult to train.
Surveillance is not only about video cameras and images. The public and social media, for exam-
ple, provide a rich source of information. Khandpur et al. use news and Twitter data to predict airport
threats [322]. The EMBERS system, a similar system to [322], predicts civil unrest events from news and
social media data [323]. EMBERS has been deployed in 10 countries since 2012. Finally, in today’s society
everyone inevitably leaves their digital traces in many places. Du et al. [312] detect pickpocketing suspects
by extracting features from large-scale public transit records using both supervised and unsupervised tech-
niques.
3.7.2
Combating crimes
The natural next step in safety enforcement is to prevent the occurrence of crimes after their detection
and to reduce the severity of their impact on innocent citizens. One recent work constructs a dataset of
32

1 million images of 50000 hotels worldwide, in an eﬀort to identify the location of the victims of human
traﬃcking [311]. In the sequel, we elaborate on two directions that the literature has focused on: the
strategic interaction with criminals and the study of the criminal network.
Strategic interactions
Zhang et al. [324] attempt to reduce the frequency of violent crimes in urban
environments with their proposed defender-adversary model, NEST, and an incremental strategy gener-
ation algorithm. The approach’s eﬀectiveness is experimentally shown for real networks up to the size
of Manhattan. The defender-adversary model used in this work, known as the security game, has been
studied extensively in a number of works. Existing works include strategically countering attacks on fer-
ries [325], cargo ships [326, 327], ports [328], public infrastructure [329, 4], border control [330], traﬃc and
transportation [331, 332, 333, 334].
Criminal network
Gang violence poses a direct threat to public safety in a number of countries, but
it exhibits a strong criminal network not commonly seen in other types of crimes. Tayebi et al. utilize
supervised learning techniques to extract social and geographical features to classify and predict potential
networks of oﬀenders who have committed crimes together [309]. Also focusing on co-oﬀender networks,
Shaabani et al. use the network information to identify criminals [335]. Based on such networks, Shakar-
ian et al. leverage techniques from inﬂuence maximization to encourage gang members to leave their
gang [313].
3.7.3
Improving law enforcement operations
Optimizing law enforcement makes police operations as a whole more eﬃcient and capable in keeping
communities safe. Carton et al. [308] attempt to augment the existing Early Intervention System (EIS),
which is used for identifying police oﬃcers who are at risk of adverse events. The work could potentially
reduce not only police casualties in events like shootings, but also police misconduct against civilians,
like racial proﬁling or incidents of brutality. The work of Chase et al. [310] aims to minimize response
times of law enforcement by optimizing response time failure risk as a MILP and using Sample Average
Approximation and Iterated Local Search.
3.7.4
Case study: identifying police oﬃcers at risk of adverse events
Target problem
Police adverse incidents such as the misuse of force pose an enormous challenge to
the police reputation and eﬀective operations in today’s political climate. A group of researchers used
predictive modeling to develop an early intervention system that can predict such adverse incidents so
that proper intervention can be carried out to prevent them from happening [308]. This problem falls into
“agent – predictive” under the AEC – DPP framework.
Why is AI needed
Recognizing the severity of the problem, most police departments in the US have an
EIS in place. However, these EISs are typically rule-based with rules designed by some experts, experienced
yet admittedly arbitrary. It is not easy for a particular police department to adjust the rules according to
its speciﬁc situation. The simple rule-based systems are also prone to gaming. A machine learning-based
EIS could alleviate these shortcomings by making the model more accurate, customizable, and more robust
to gaming. However, we would like to argue that whether the AI-based EIS can deliver these beneﬁts is
subject to doubt. Nevertheless, it is worthwhile to study this project to see how AI can function in this
setting.
33

Intervention overview
The authors formulated the problem as a binary classiﬁcation task: whether
a police oﬃcer will have an adverse event within one year from now. Most of the technical eﬀort was
focused on feature generation. A total of 432 features include information on the historical frequencies of
adverse incidents, the training history, and the patrol neighborhood of a given oﬃcer. Several time series,
normalized, or high-order features based on the aforementioned features are also included. The authors
used several oﬀ-the-shelf classiﬁers such as AdaBoost, random forests, logistic regression, and SVM, and
found that random forests performed the best. The authors also performed an exploratory predictive anal-
ysis about which dispatch event might lead to adverse events, and a similar random forest approach was
used.
Data used
The authors obtained data on adverse incidents from the collaborating police departments.
Also obtained from the police department include other data such as dispatch events, complaints, arrests,
employee records, etc. They are used as input features in the predictive model.
Resources needed
This project was conceived under the White House’s Police Data Initiative. Having
a high-level endorsement probably ensured the resources for the collaboration with not just the partnering
police department in [308] but also several police departments across the country.
Deployment status
The researchers on the project reported that such data-driven EIS was implemented
or is currently being used at the police departments in multiple cities including Charlotte-Mecklenburg,
Nashville, San Francisco and so on. The authors have also licensed the work to a commercial company to
scale up deployment.18
3.8
AI for Transportation
Agent
Descriptive
Real-time parking availability [336]
Predictive
Predict arrival time [337]
Prescriptive
Transportation recommendation [338]
Environment
Descriptive
Traﬃc detection [339]
Predictive
Traﬃc forecast [340]
Prescriptive
Bike-share rebalancing [341]
Community
Descriptive
Multi-agent transportation representation (Testbed for air traﬃc
controllers [342])
Predictive
Bike-share demand prediction []
Prescriptive
Route optimization [343]
Table 8: AEC and DPP categorization of research on AI for transportation.
The number of vehicles operating on public roads increases each day, and with it, the amount of con-
gestion and vulnerability to fatal accidents or injury. Many developments in transportation have served to
improve eﬃciency of existing transportation methods, thereby mitigating the aforementioned issues. AI
can be utilized to help accomplish this, which has already been done to a great extent. We categorize some
18Benchmark Analytics. https://www.benchmarkanalytics.com/
34

example works in table 8 using the AEC and DPP structure. In this subsection, we discuss traﬃc manage-
ment from at a macro-level and travel optimization from an individual’s perspective. We also discuss the
new challenges that arise from shared mobility.
3.8.1
Traﬃc management
Traﬃc management concerns the monitoring, regulation, and improvement of the traﬃc network, which
is vital to the proper functionality of the city. We discuss two problems for which AI is a natural ﬁt: traﬃc
detection and traﬃc prediction.
Traﬃc detection
Two problems that go hand in hand are traﬃc detection and traﬃc prediction. Accu-
rately detecting the current traﬃc condition lays the groundwork for all aspects of prediction and decision-
making in transportation. At the smallest scale, a few works have explored vehicle detection from cam-
era [344] and satellite [345] images using computer vision techniques. Going to traﬃc condition detection,
Wang et al. attempt to infer the real-time traﬃc condition at locations without cameras based on video at
nearby intersections using probabilistic inference [346]. Other authors combine images with social media
data using time series methods like linear dynamical systems [347] or acoustic (traﬃc noise) data using
audio extraction algorithms [339] to infer traﬃc information. [348] and [347] focus on anomaly detection
in urban traﬃc. At a conceptual level, the above-mentioned works use some form of raw data to infer
the traﬃc volume or its correlation with other events. In contrast, Krumm and Horvitz strive to reduce
the quantity of raw data needed by having only a subset of measuring stations and vehicles report the
data [349], leveraging inference methods on the Markov random ﬁeld. This could be useful in mitigating
the privacy concern of data-sharing.
Traﬃc prediction
A natural step after traﬃc detection is to predict the traﬃc variable using historical
data. Traﬃc forecasting is a time series prediction problem with a spatial component that can be naturally
modeled as a graph. Therefore, a lot of works have considered using graph neural networks with recurrent
architecture [340, 350, 351, 352]. Song et al. use deep multi-task LSTMs to build a simulation model for
urban traﬃc and human mobility [353].
3.8.2
Travel and route optimization
Based on traﬃc detection and prediction, there has been considerable progress in travel prediction and opti-
mization. To predict the travel time given a sequence of GPS or grid locations, researchers have attempted
using RNN/CNN-based deep learning methods [337, 354] as well as dynamic Bayesian networks [355].
Liu et al. study and deployed a transportation recommendation system given a user-speciﬁed origin-
destination pair [338]. While the vehicle routing problem has been extensively studied, a few works explore
new aspects by planning the safest route [356] and suggesting routes in a multi-agent setting where the
algorithm aims to maximize the chance of arrival on time for all users [343].
3.8.3
Shared mobility
In the past few years, shared mobility has become more and more common in many countries. The most
prominent ones include ride-sharing services such as Uber and Lyft and bike-sharing services such as
CitiBike and Mobike. These new forms of transportation introduce many new research challenges.
35

Bike-sharing
For bike-sharing systems, rebalancing is a key operational challenge to preserve a reason-
able distribution of bikes. O’Mahony and Shmoys studied and deployed an overnight rebalancing scheme
in New York City [341]. In [357] the authors propose a dynamic rebalancing strategy that reasons about
the uncertain demand. Both works feature a (mixed) integer linear program as the main algorithmic contri-
bution, while others take a reinforcement learning approach [358]. Singla et al. [359] design a mechanism
to incentivize users to balance the bikes themselves. All these works assume a dock-based bike-sharing
system. Pan et al. attempt to address the rebalancing problem in a dockless bike-sharing system using deep
reinforcement learning [360]. Rather than rebalancing decisions, there is also work on dock-level demand
prediction using clustering [361] or graph embedding and RNN [362].
Ride-sharing
AI is currently being used to improve several aspects of the operation of ride-sharing
platforms such as Uber and Lyft. The ﬁrst aspect is the dispatching system. A number of recent works use
reinforcement learning to match passengers and drivers [363, 364, 365]. For example, Xu et al. propose a
learning and planning framework, where the oﬄine learning component uses historical data to learn an
MDP characterizing the dispatching dynamics and the online planning component solves a combinatorial
optimization problem to match the driver and passenger in real-time [365]. Another aspect is the pricing
scheme [366, 367, 368]. Drivers and passengers are both autonomous agents, and thus even if they are
matched, a trip will happen only if the pricing is reasonable. Ma et al. design a spatio-temporal pricing
mechanism such that it is a subgame-perfect equilibrium for the driver to accept the dispatch [369].
3.8.4
Case study: data analysis and optimization for bike-sharing
Target problem
Bike-sharing (with docks) services are common in many cities. A user of such a bike-
sharing system has two central considerations. First, can the user always ﬁnd a bike when they need
it? Second, can the user always return a bike when they need to? Underlying these two questions is the
management of the docks. The system operator needs to make sure that docks do not run out of bikes and
are not completely full of bikes by rebalancing the system. In a line of works [341, 370, 371], researchers
partner with CitiBike in New York City to tackle this problem. This problem falls into “community –
prescriptive” under the AEC – DPP framework.
Why is AI needed
Bike-sharing operators typically have trucks and bike trailers to transport bikes
from one (full) dock to another (empty dock). However, AI, in this case, optimization aided with plenty of
real-world data, can provide a systematic way of scheduling these rebalancing actions.
Intervention overview
The authors ﬁrst analyze the data to identify the ﬂow of bikes at each dock,
classifying them into producers, consumers, and self-balanced docks. Then, the authors propose mathe-
matical program formulations to two distinct scenarios: mid-rush balancing and overnight balancing. For
the mid-rush balancing, the authors formulate a MIP which aims to pair up 푘producer and consumer docks
that are close to each other, so that bikes can be moved from the producer dock to the consumer dock. A
bisecting search can solve the MIP eﬃciently in practice. The overnight balancing problem is to ﬁnd truck
(which moves the bikes) routes that rebalance the system as much as possible. The authors ﬁrst formulate
a MIP as well, yet it cannot scale to the problem at hand. Thus, they formulate the problem as a covering
problem which admits the greedy heuristic of submodular maximization.
Data used
The authors partnered with CitiBike, from whom they obtain the data. The relevant data
include the real-time availabilities of each bike dock, which allow the authors to analyze the diﬀerent
36

usage patterns at each dock.
Deployment status
The researchers have been working with CitiBike since 2013. The rebalancing al-
gorithm is currently being used or integrated into the operation of CitiBike in New York City. As the
researchers quote the Citibike director of operations, their approaches provide an “overarching vision for
how we like our system to look” [341].
AI in retrospect
The design of the algorithms did take into account some practical operational features.
For example, the mathematical program for overnight rebalancing only allows for the transportation of
a full truckload from one dock to another. More ﬂexible logistics are harder to implement in practice.
However, the overnight rebalancing did not achieve as much rebalancing as one would like. One reason
is that there are not enough trucks which transport the bikes overnight. This led the authors to focus on
whether the docks are placed at the optimal locations in their subsequent work. While CitiBike did relocate
a limited number of docks, further relocation is limited by nontechnical factors such as community politics.
3.8.5
Other works
The literature in transportation has also increasingly leveraged AI techniques. We refer interested readers
to [372] for a survey of this literature.
4
Common Research Challenges in AI for Social Good
The wide variety of AI4SG applications has, in turn, motivated a number of interesting AI research topics.
As we will see, most of these questions are not speciﬁc to any application domain, but are challenges shared
by AI4SG researchers in many diﬀerent domains, based on their distinct but similar struggles.
4.1
Learning from Limited Data
Many, though not all, areas of AI are inherently data-driven. However, AI4SG researchers often ﬁnd them-
selves working with collaborators who do not have enough data that are required by the modern AI tech-
niques. A wildlife conservation site with only a handful of patrol teams can collect limited amount of data
about poaching activities; a community service organization serving a few thousand residents only have
social care program data in the order of thousands; an education non-proﬁt engaging with students in a
mid-size town might only collect at most a few thousand learning trajectories. Even in seemingly data-rich
domains like healthcare, high-quality data that ﬁt the task are often still not readily available. Thus, dealing
with limited data is a common research challenge in AI4SG.
At a high level, in a typical machine learning problem, we want to learn a model 푓∶푋→푌using
training dataset 퐷= {(푥, 푦) ∈푋× 푌} sampled from some distribution. Learning from limited data means
that the training set 퐷is small, and as a result, the learned model may not generalize to unseen data. AI4SG
projects have extended existing methods and also contributed to developing new methods for handling
this challenge, with some of them tailored to a speciﬁc application and others applicable to a wide range
of domains even beyond AI4SG projects.
First, in the work of You et al. [24] on crop yield prediction with Deep Gaussian Process, the authors
use dimensionality reduction to deal with the limited dataset. With less than 10000 satellite images, which
is already a larger dataset than many AI4SG applications, it is hard to use deep learning directly. The
37

authors realize that the exact position of a pixel on the image does not matter and thus use some low-
dimensional statistics such as the count of diﬀerent pixel types as inputs instead. Zhou et al. employ a
method similar in spirit [156]. When using electrocardiograph data to predict Atrial Fibrillation, Zhou et
al. use the slide-and-cut method to cut a long sequence into several shorter sequences, thereby augmenting
the dataset.
Second, Ma et al. use graph-based semi-supervised learning to predict drug-drug interactions, because
labeled data are rare but unlabeled data are abundant for new drugs [138]. A similar approach is used by
Fan et al. to predict opioid use with Twitter posts [373].
Third, when trying to predict water pipe failures, Yan et al. discovered that many data points have
missing features [273]. Such scenario is not uncommon in many datasets manually collected by govern-
ment agencies and NGOs. Instead of dropping these data points ̃퐷, Yan et al. leverage the underlying
connections between these points based on domain knowledge and use a stochastic process to directly
model the correlations without using the missing features.
Fourth, Holman et al. use the data from normal weather stations to estimate reference evapotran-
spiration, when the dedicated evapotranspiration station network is too sparse and thus cannot provide
satisfactory data [32]. Shen et al. use the similar idea of transfer learning to analyze the Chinese microblog-
ging site Weibo for depression detection while the only available data are about Twitter [199]. Twitter data
are not as desirable as a substitute because of the vast diﬀerences in language and culture, and hence a
transfer learning approach is justiﬁed and shown to perform well.
4.2
Tackling Biased Data
Even if we have a sizable dataset 퐷, there might still be bias in every aspect of the data. For example,
datasets of disease diagnosis based on images might contain noisy labels, environmental survey data might
be scarce at remote locations and rich in easily accessible areas, and social service data may be the result
of unlogged social interventions. These diﬀerent problems from diﬀerent domains can be summarized as a
common research challenge in AI4SG: tackling biased data. Below we discuss three types of problems on
bias in the dataset and how the community addresses them.
First, under the assumption that noisy data points lead to low-conﬁdence prediction outcomes, Zhou
et al. use a margin-based algorithm to rule out the noisy examples from the training procedure [156]. In
this case, the noise is inherent to the data generation process. In other occasions, the noise might be from
the measurement of the data, and Shankar et al. [374] propose ways to denoise observational data from
measurement error.
Second, Chen and Gomes propose the Shift Compensation Network to address the distribution shift
problem in citizen science data [375], which is a common problem in applied machine learning. Distribution
shift means that the model is developed using data 퐷sampled from some distribution 푝(푥) but will be
evaluated on data 퐷′ following some other distribution 푞(푥). For example, citizen scientists might only
collect data at locations that are easily accessible, but the AI tool developed from these data is supposed to
be used at all locations. Chen and Gomes factor the distribution shift 푞(푥)/푝(푥) into the model construction
phase, by changing the loss from 피(푥,푦)∼푞[] to 피(푥,푦)∼푝[푞(푥)
푝(푥)]. When the researcher can inﬂuence the data
collectors, Xue et al. develop game-theoretic mechanisms to incentivize better data collection [376]. Fan
et al. use techniques from recommendation systems to augment data points based on similarities where
the dataset is sparse [377].
Third, Kube et al. use causal inference methods such as the Bayesian additive regression tree to allocate
social services to the homeless people [276]. Causal inference is important in such applications because the
historical data of service allocation could contain selection bias. In general, we may observe in historical
38

data 퐷outcome 푌푖(푎) for some individual 푖who received treatment 푎, and we would like to estimate the
outcome 푌푖(푏) had they received treatment 푏. When doing prescriptive analysis about interventions, the
rich literature on causal inference on observational data could be useful [175, 174]. However, a more
diﬃcult but unfortunately common situation in AI4SG applications is where the interventions 푎and 푏are
not logged in the dataset. Standard causal inference techniques often have limited applicability. In this
case, Killian et al. work closely with the practitioners to construct reasonable counterfactual estimates
speciﬁc to the problem of allocating medication adherence resources to the patients at highest risk [212].
4.3
Stackelberg Leadership Models
The leader-follower model, also known as the Stackelberg leadership model or the Stackelberg game, was
ﬁrst proposed as an economic model of the market competition between ﬁrms [378]. The problem is
also a case of bi-level optimization problem which was studied in the operations research community.
Strategic leader-follower interactions are common in several AI4SG applications. Typically, the project’s
collaborating partner acts as the “leader” that implements some mechanism. Then, the partner interacts
with strategic “followers” who often have conﬂicting interest with the partner. In public safety, for example,
the law enforcement agency designs some dispatch strategy and the potential adversaries will react to this
strategy. Similarly, in anti-poaching, the conservation agency decides on a patrol plan and the poachers
will try to evade the patrollers. The shared research problem is to compute an optimal leader strategy in
these applications.
Inspired by these application domains mentioned above, researchers have focused on a special type
of Stackelberg models called the Stackelberg security game (SSG). In an SSG, the defender (leader) carries
out the routine protection practice. The attacker conducts reconnaissance in order to learn the defender’s
protection strategy and designs the optimal attack plan. Since its initial introduction [379], SSG has re-
ceived extensive theoretical research and has led to several inﬂuential deployment cases in public safety
and environmental sustainability, such as coast guard patrolling [328], airport security [4], and wildlife
conservation [9].
The SSG characterizes the adversarial interaction between a defender and an attacker. There is a set of
targets 푁that the defender wants to protect and the attacker tries to attack. The defender has 푟defensive
resources. Using these resources, the defender can protect target 푖with probability 푝푖– this is the defender’s
strategy. The attacker’s strategy is to choose a target to attack. When target 푖is attacked, the defender’s
utility is 푈푑(푖, 푝) = 푅푑
푖푝푖+ 푃푑
푖(1 −푝푖) and the attacker’s utility is 푈푎(푖, 푝) = 푅푎
푖(1 −푝푖) + 푃푎
푖푝푖, where
푅푑, 푃푑, 푅푎, 푃푎are the reward and penalty parameters for the two players. The typical solution concept is
the strong Stackelberg equilibrium, where the attacker best responds to the defender strategy by attacking
target 푖∗= 퐵푅(푝∗), and the defender, knowing the attacker will best respond, chooses a coverage strategy
푝∗that maximizes their own utility. That is,
푝∗= arg max
푝
푈푑(퐵푅(푝), 푝)
where
퐵푅(푝) = arg max
푖
푈푎(푖, 푝).
This is a bi-level optimization problem and is hard to solve in general [380]. However, some simpler SSG
structures allow for eﬃcient algorithms such as multiple linear programs [381] and ORIGAMI [382]. Al-
gorithms like cutting plane [383] and double oracle [384] are often used to handle real-world scale SSG
problems.
Over the years, the deployment experience of SSG models has inspired plenty of further research on
top of the basic SSG model. Attackers are humans who are not always rational, and some works have
39

considered bounded rationality models such as (subjective utility) quantal response [385, 386]. Since it is
often impossible to know the attacker’s utilities exactly, some researchers have proposed algorithms which
allow for payoﬀuncertainty [387], and to learn the utilities from data [388]. Moreover, real-world scenarios
motivated the work on multiple attackers with collusion [389], payoﬀmanipulation [390], and repeated
interactions [391]. Due to space limitations, we introduce the most basic setup and the main application-
inspired research questions of SSG. Interested readers may refer to [392] for a more complete survey of the
SSG literature.
Beyond the SSGs which have been used in public safety and environmental sustainability domains,
Stackelberg models have also found other applications in sustainability. The citizen scientists often collect
data at convenient locations which leads to bias in the dataset. Xue et al. design a leader-follower game,
with the leader being the organization and followers being the citizen scientists, to incentivize the followers
to collect better data [376].
4.4
Privacy-preserving ML
A common scenario in AI4SG projects is that an organization that has sensitive data 퐷collaborates with
a researcher. The researcher needs access to the data, while the organization wants to protect the privacy
as much as possible. Indeed, privacy is often a deal-breaker. Patients are sensitive about sharing their
EHR data; households receiving social care are sensitive about sharing income data; the general public
has lots of concerns with sharing surveillance videos from public cameras. Governments, companies, and
other organizations would not share any data if privacy is not taken care of, since usually privacy is tied
to legal liability. The most common privacy practice is that the organization removes certain personally-
identifying information from the dataset before sending the data to the researchers. However, this cannot
actually protect the identities, with several famous linkage attacks successfully identiﬁed individuals in
public anonymous datasets [393, 394, 395]. Therefore, a promising way of dealing with the privacy concern
and improving the adoption of AI4SG work is to develop privacy-preserving ML.
Chen et al. propose to follow the framework of diﬀerential privacy (DP), which is one of the most popu-
lar methods in privacy-preserving ML, to deal with data privacy in transportation [396]. A few subsequent
works focus on the privacy of human mobility data using the DP framework [397, 398]. Using a similar
technique, Yu et al. release genome-wide association studies dataset while preserving privacy [399].
Diﬀerential privacy is a privacy concept with a rigorous mathematical formulation and relatively few
assumptions about the attacker capability [400, 401]. At a high level, a randomized mechanism 푀is dif-
ferentially private if its output on the dataset 퐷is roughly the same as its output on the dataset ̃퐷which
diﬀers from 퐷by only one entry. More precisely, with small parameters 휖and 훿and any event 푆in the
probability simplex, ℙ[푀(퐷) ∈푆] ≤푒휖ℙ[푀( ̃퐷) ∈푆] + 훿. The mechanism is applied to a statistical query. In
fact, many common ML algorithms can be learned in a diﬀerentially private way, if they can be adapted
to be based on statistical queries [402, 403, 404]. Recently, Papernot et al propose an ensemble learning
framework that can work with arbitrary ML algorithms [405]. However, all the above works assume that
the ML algorithm runs on the clean and sensitive dataset 퐷(just that the trained ML model has privacy
guarantee). In practice, this is sometimes insuﬃcient, since the organization still needs to deliver the sen-
sitive data to the researchers, and once this happens the organization has (practically) no control over the
data. To remedy this problem, an ideal goal is to generate synthetic data that follow a similar distribution as
the true data. This is hard in the worst case and signiﬁcant restriction of query space needs to be imposed
to preserve the privacy guarantee [406]. There have been some works that deal with such restrictions and
aim to release privacy-preserved datasets [396, 407]. Some recent works, such as those of Xie et al. [408]
and Jordon et al. [409] use GANs to generate DP synthetic datasets, as the GAN’s generator is a natural
40

tool for this task.
Orthogonal to the DP framework, some other works on ML for healthcare use homomorphic encryp-
tion [410] to preserve privacy. For example, Bos et al. predict the probability for suﬀering cardiovascular
disease [411]. Using homomorphic encryption, the organization can encrypt the original data 퐷before
handing them to the researchers. The researchers build models ̃푓(⋅) on the encrypted data ̃퐷. When the
model ̃푓(⋅) is delivered back to the organization, the organization can decrypt the model and apply it to
the original data 퐷. Compared to diﬀerential privacy which trades privacy for accuracy, homomorphic
encryption trades privacy for computation eﬃciency.
We believe that there is a lot of potential for the AI4SG community to further contribute to this line
of research, as AI4SG researchers often have ﬁrst-hand experience dealing with privacy concerns and the
privacy problem is closely connected with the AI algorithm that is used on the data.
4.5
Human in the Loop
AI4SG is meant to work with humans, not in place of humans. A medical diagnosis algorithm is not to
replace the doctors, a social care allocation algorithm will not replace the social workers, and a sketch-
based tutoring system will not replace the teachers. The doctors, social workers, and teachers have lots
of knowledge and experience that the most powerful AI algorithm today cannot barely match. In these
applications, and in almost all AI4SG applications, it is an important and common research challenge in
AI4SG to study how humans and AI algorithms can work together in synergy.
The interaction between human and algorithms has been at the center of HCI research since its incep-
tion [412, 413]. The renaissance of AI in the past decade, for the ﬁrst time ever, brings AI into the work
and life of the public. As a result, we observe a growing emphasis of human-compatible AI from both the
HCI [414] and AI [415] communities.
Humans can be incorporated into the algorithmic decision loop in several roles. In the work on Bansal
et al., humans take the AI algorithm’s suggestion and form the ﬁnal decision in recidivism prediction,
in-hospital mortality prediction, and credit risk assessment [416]. Lee et al. study the matching of donor
and recipient in the food rescue setting [417]. The authors use the learned human preference models to
vote for diﬀerent allocation options, thereby incorporating the humans into the AI algorithm itself. In
general, humans could be the experts that handle “hard cases” that the algorithm is not conﬁdent about.
A large body of work is dedicated to user studies on AI-based tools that are developed to assist tasks and
decision-making in healthcare [418, 419, 420].
5
Discussion
We now discuss a few issues in the AI4SG research. These might not be “technical” research topics as
described in the previous section. However, they are arguably more important to the existence and devel-
opment of the AI4SG community.
5.1
Types of AI for Social Good Problems
We used two domain-agnostic ways to classify AI4SG projects. For each project, we consider whether it
is descriptive, predictive, or prescriptive. Based on the deﬁnition at the beginning of Section 3, we also
consider whether it falls into agent, environment, or community category. As we demonstrated through-
out Section 3, diﬀerent application domains feature diﬀerent distribution of these categories. For example,
social care and urban planning have few works in the agent category, while education has few descriptive
41

works, which is not unreasonable given the nature of these domains. However, in general, prescriptive
analysis in the community category, i.e., analysis on decision-making in a multi-agent setting, is less com-
mon despite that this is potentially the most impactful direction in many domains. One possible reason is
that prescriptive projects are more inclined to receiving pushbacks in deployment with the collaborating
partner, especially when the work needs to consider the preferences of multiple agents and the interaction
between them.
From the perspective of AI and human’s capabilities, there are two types of problems that AI has been
used to solve. First, some tasks are not hard for humans but AI can speed up the process, e.g. image
recognition. Second, there are some tasks that humans cannot do well, or do not know if we are doing
well, and we hope AI to do better than us [421]. We have seen multiple commercial successes with the
former [422, 423]. The latter is harder, yet for more or less, AI4SG relies on the latter. For the majority
of social good problems, we as a society have not yet found an eﬀective solution. Of course, one should
beware of the “AI solutionism” approach since AI, or even technology in general, is almost always not the
panacea. It is thus important to study AI4SG to explore whether and how AI can be a piece to the puzzle.
Towards this end, it is important to consider evaluation (Section 5.2) and human compatibility (Section 4.5).
5.2
Evaluation of Work on AI for Social Good
The evaluation of AI4SG projects is necessarily more complicated than ordinary AI research. Since AI4SG
research is driven by real-world social good problems, it is important that it is evaluated in the context of
its intended application domain. There are at least three levels of evaluation for an AI4SG project, as we
elaborate below.
First, in addition to standard performance metrics such as accuracy, running time, and resource con-
sumption, the evaluation of AI4SG projects should leverage domain-speciﬁc performance metrics. For
example, when designing ML models to predict high school dropouts, Lakkaraju et al. [64] used “preci-
sion/recall at top 퐾” to report metrics that are directly relevant to the educator’s decision-making process.
However, a lot of works in AI4SG do not reach this level of evaluation, and almost none of the existing
AI4SG research move beyond this step.
Second, to demonstrate that an AI4SG project improves over the current practice, it is important to
evaluate the project in the ﬁeld. Some people believe that an ideal solution is to run randomized control
trials (RCT). For example, Delle Fave et al. [424] conducted an RCT with Los Angeles County Sheriﬀ’s
Department to evaluate the security game algorithms on the metro system in Los Angeles. Indeed, RCTs
present lots of practical challenges to the researcher and are in many cases infeasible. However, conducting
non-randomized ﬁeld trials is still much better than merely evaluating AI algorithms on real (or even
synthetic) data.
Third, when evaluating an AI4SG project one needs to be aware of its impact beyond the most direct
problem that AI is being developed for, as social issues are inherently multi-faceted [425]. For example,
combating poaching activities might lead to an increase of other types of illegal activities as the poachers
lose their income sources. Societal problems, and the alleviation thereof, are almost never represented
by a single metric. The decline in one metric might also accompany the improvement in another. As a
distant example, with the prevalence of digital libraries, the circulation at public libraries is decreasing, but
libraries are increasingly functioning as a trusted public space for community and education events [425].
Thus, the measurement of AI4SG projects needs to account for the diﬀerent facets of the problem, including
the unintended negative consequences.
42

5.3
Sustainable Deployment of AI for Social Good Projects
The principal motivation for AI4SG research is to address social problems. An algorithm that stays only
in the lab does not fulﬁll its purpose. Unfortunately, the deployment still lags far behind. For most papers,
the connection to real-world usage is established only via experiments on real datasets. Very few papers
feature ﬁeld tests/pilot studies, and even fewer have the AI contribution been actually deployed as a routine
operation.
Furthermore, of the few works that have been deployed, sustaining the work poses a signiﬁcant chal-
lenge. The website of the agricultural marketplace in Uganda [28], as studied in Section 3.1, stopped up-
dating in March 2018, which is roughly the time of the paper publication. The online discussion forum for
lectures [61], as studied in Section 3.2, was used in one additional semester after the paper’s publication, yet
has not been used again since then. Of course, there are some projects that have sustained for a reasonable
amount of time. After some initial pilot study, the wildlife conservation tool PAWS (Section 3.3) recently
collaborated with the SMART conservation software and Microsoft which will enable it to be deployed in
over 600 conservation sites in the world. Despite some setbacks, the active learning method for water pipe
replacement in Flint (Section 3.6) is now put back to use.
We emphasize that whether a project gets to the deployment stage depends on not just the AI re-
searchers. Lots of other factors could play a role, such as the partner organization’s willingness and the
project’s funding status. A few works identiﬁed some key factors that lead to successful deployment and
the lessons learned. However, we need to be cautious about how these lessons are derived. As corroborated
by Baier et al. [426], oftentimes only the challenges that are overcome are reported in the paper. These
challenges are only a tip of the iceberg considering the low rate of deployment of AI4SG research. To oﬀer
such constructive suggestions, one needs to learn the projects throughout and talk to stakeholders and
measure their impact. Fortunately, a few recent works have started to take on this direction [427, 14], and
we refer interested readers to them for a detailed discussion.
Sustainable deployment is not the only gold standard to judge the impact of an AI4SG project. A project
can be considered a success if it has impacted and transformed the existing solution to the social problem,
even if the AI project itself is not being continually deployed. In practice, the relationship between deploy-
ment and social impact may become even more nuanced. While we believe that everyone contributing
to AI4SG has good faith in doing good, people also inevitably have other motivations, which are likely
diverse. In some cases, the domain organization of an AI4SG project might care more about being able to
tell an “AI story” than the actual problem which the AI tool is developed to address. This is not completely
unwarranted, since a better story might lead to, e.g., more funding, which might be even more valuable to
the organization than solving the original problem. After all, for a social care provider, between streamlin-
ing the data-to-decision process and securing a grant to hire ﬁve additional social workers, which is more
beneﬁcial to the society? Thus, if we are true to our core value of AI4SG, it is imperative to acknowledge
these issues as well as factor them into the evaluation process.
5.4
Lessons from ICTD for AI for Social Good
AI4SG is not the ﬁrst research community that seeks to address social problems with technological ap-
proaches. The community of Information & Communication Technologies and Development (ICTD) started
to form in the 1990s and organized its ﬁrst main conference in 2006.19 Arguably, ICTD has gone farther
than AI4SG in bringing research into the ﬁeld. As a key lesson from ICTD, it is the people, not the tech-
nology, that is central to any impact of a project. People are generally resistant to external intervention,
19https://www.ischool.berkeley.edu/events/2006/ictd-2006-intl-conference-
information-and-communication-technologies-and-development
43

and a large portion of the researcher’s job is to work with the domain collaborators or research subjects to
identify the proper intervention that is acceptable. Without the local buy-in, it is unlikely that the project
will be sustainable [428]. The AI4SG community has come to realize this issue. For example, the TAHMO
project,20 which aims to build a network of weather stations across Africa, although conceived in the global
north, is now owned and operated by Africans.
Furthermore, it is not enough just to acknowledge that humans are at the center of technological in-
terventions. In fact, technology only ampliﬁes the underlying human forces, rather than creates them, as
Toyama advocates in Geek Heresy [429], a book about ICTD. Toyama argues that social media facilitated
political revolutions in countries like Egypt where local organizational capacity was already strong, but
failed to do so in other countries like Saudi Arabia where such human forces were not present. Most of the
deployed AI4SG projects which we highlighted in the case studies also illustrate this point. Even without
the AI intervention, the wildlife rangers will still conduct patrols, the bike-sharing docks will still be re-
balanced, the contaminated water pipes in Flint will still be replaced. In these cases, AI does not create a
new program. Instead, it is developed to improve the eﬃcacy or eﬃciency of the existing program.
In addition, the “human forces” include not only tangible movements or programs, but also the incen-
tives. The kidney exchange serves as a perfect example. The early works on the kidney exchange focused
on solving the matching problem as eﬃciently as possible, as we introduced in Section 3.4. However,
the transplant centers have their own incentives which are diﬀerent from those of the patients and the
general public. In particular, the centers want as many transplants to happen internally as possible for
proﬁt and logistic reasons. Thus, they tend not to publish all of their patient/donor information to the
national exchange. This could signiﬁcantly limit the function of the national exchange and the AI algo-
rithms running on it, since most cases that get sent to the exchange are hard-to-match ones. Realizing this
issue, researchers started to develop mechanisms that incentivize the transplant centers to reveal all their
patients to the exchange [430, 431].
5.5
Who Gets to Study AI for Social Good?
To conclude this section, we discuss a seemingly simple question: who gets to study AI4SG? To a lot of us,
the answer might be obvious: everyone! Beyond doubt, we welcome and encourage everyone interested in
developing AI for socially relevant problems to contribute to this fast-growing ﬁeld. However, the question
we ask here is slightly diﬀerent: who “has the opportunity to” study AI4SG, not who “should” study AI4SG.
Most of the papers that we surveyed, and all of the “successful” projects that we studied in detail, are
led by academic institutions in collaboration with organizations or government agencies in the relevant
application domain. In such cases, the project’s funding typically depends on research grants, which is
unsustainable for continued deployment. Because of the tight budget, even pilot studies can pose signiﬁcant
challenges. Recently, many industry companies have launched AI4SG initiatives and some of these AI4SG
projects have reached the deployment stage.21 Due to the more generous funding situation, the massive
public relations vehicle, and simply the company’s presence in local communities, these AI4SG projects
tend to reach a larger community. While academia-centered AI4SG projects and industry-centered AI4SG
projects have slightly diﬀerent motivations, they share the common enthusiasm about social good. It is
important to ﬁnd a way for academic researchers to leverage the industry’s ﬁnancial and infrastructure
power and for the industry to leverage the most cutting-edge research advances in academia. Industry
research grants might be helpful,22 but they are not wildly diﬀerent from the de facto funding model in
20https://tahmo.org/
21Some examples include Microsoft AI for Earth, IBM Science for Social Good, and Google AI for Social Good.
22Some examples include Microsoft AI for Earth Grant and Google AI Impact Challenge.
44

academia. Some more novel form of partnerships might be promising, as mentioned in Section 3.3 for
PAWS.
Another serious problem is the geographic imbalance of AI4SG research. Although we attempted to in-
clude more works from less well-known institutions and/or research groups in our case studies, eventually
all of them are based at leading universities in North America. In fact, a few of them feature researchers
from North America studying problems in other places like Africa. A ﬁeld dominated by people from a
certain culture will at best fail to recognize some key problems and considerations in the culture that the
research is applied to, and at worst form an exclusive and biased climate within the ﬁeld. This problem
is not unique to AI4SG, yet since it is AI4SG’s central belief to aﬀect and work with people, this problem
could be a deal-breaker in the promise of AI4SG. We hope that more researchers from these developing
regions, who have a much better understanding of the local society, could have the chance to make their
voices heard. The situation is improving, though, as can be seen in their rising presence at several AI4SG
workshops at recent AI conferences.
Finally, for researchers who are not in the few “big groups” with rich social connections, it is still hard
for them to work on good AI4SG problems. On the one hand, building connections takes signiﬁcant eﬀort
and has been traditionally less emphasized and rewarded in the AI research community. Yet it is a valuable
aspect of AI4SG research. As remarked by Felten [432],
If you are the person that a decision-maker or their staﬀthinks to call when a complicated question
comes up, then you are in the position to do some good. But you don’t get to be that person just by
volunteering – you get to be that person by being continually helpful and constructive in dealing
with them over time.
The lack of continuous engagement harms not only the project at hand, but also the whole AI4SG commu-
nity, as it is no news that a small portion of AI researchers treat their collaborating partners as nothing but
a mine of data and disconnect themselves once a paper is accepted. This negatively impacts the partner’s
willingness to collaborate with any researcher in the future.
On the other hand, it is also undesirable if connections become a hard threshold of entry. Researchers
without signiﬁcant prior experience could start with local, small-scale problems. There have been multiple
information platforms for AI4SG projects, where people could post problems and others could seek prob-
lems to solve, such as DSSG Solve23 and AI Commons24. However, these platforms have yet to show any
scale of operation. DataKind25 is a similar platform with more active management that has successfully
facilitated multiple AI4SG projects. There are also competition platforms like DrivenData26. For students,
fellowship programs such as Data Science for Social Good at multiple universities27 provide a short-term
experience working with stakeholders that have an existing partnership with the programs.
6
Conclusion
Over the past decade, AI for social good has evolved from a concept in a handful of research papers to a
full-blown research theme that has received recognition from the academics, industry, government, and
other organizations. In this paper, we attempt to record this historic progress from multiple aspects. We
provide a quantitative overview of the AI4SG research eﬀorts categorized by application domains and AI
23https://www.solveforgood.org/
24https://aicommons.com/
25https://www.datakind.org/
26https://www.drivendata.org/
27Some examples include the University of Chicago, the University of Washington, and the University of British Columbia.
45

techniques. We introduce three approaches to systematically analyze AI4SG research and illustrate them
by a detailed account of the AI4SG research in eight application domains. From all these research eﬀorts,
we distill ﬁve common research challenges. We also discuss a few aspects of the AI4SG research as a result
of analyzing the literature.
Standing at the start of a new decade, we believe the future of AI4SG lies in the deployment. By no
means do we intend to belittle the intrinsic scientiﬁc value of research that stays in the lab. However,
without measurable short-to-medium term real-world impact, AI4SG would fail to deliver its promise.
Should this happen, it is not just the research community that would bear the loss. This is an arduous task.
Fortunately, we are in an unprecedented era where the importance of AI has become a societal consensus.
The numerous souls who make a lifelong commitment to societal problems deserve our respect, curiosity,
time, and life. The technical contributions and empirical lessons from several disciplines (e.g. program
evaluation, ICTD, HCI) are valuable toolboxes and opportunities for meaningful new research. We hope
this survey will inspire the community to take on new challenges and proceed creatively.
