Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
MASKGAN: BETTER TEXT GENERATION VIA FILLING
IN THE
William Fedus, Ian Goodfellow and Andrew M. Dai
Google Brain

ABSTRACT
Neural text generation models are often autoregressive language models or seq2seq
models. These models generate text by sampling words sequentially, with each
word conditioned on the previous word, and are state-of-the-art for several machine
translation and summarization benchmarks. These benchmarks are often deﬁned
by validation perplexity even though this is not a direct measure of the quality
of the generated text. Additionally, these models are typically trained via maxi-
mum likelihood and teacher forcing. These methods are well-suited to optimizing
perplexity but can result in poor sample quality since generating text requires condi-
tioning on sequences of words that may have never been observed at training time.
We propose to improve sample quality using Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs), which explicitly train the generator to produce high quality samples and
have shown a lot of success in image generation. GANs were originally designed
to output differentiable values, so discrete language generation is challenging for
them. We claim that validation perplexity alone is not indicative of the quality
of text generated by a model. We introduce an actor-critic conditional GAN that
ﬁlls in missing text conditioned on the surrounding context. We show qualita-
tively and quantitatively, evidence that this produces more realistic conditional and
unconditional text samples compared to a maximum likelihood trained model.
1
INTRODUCTION
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) (Graves et al., 2012) are the most common generative model for
sequences as well as for sequence labeling tasks. They have shown impressive results in language
modeling (Mikolov et al., 2010), machine translation (Wu et al., 2016) and text classiﬁcation (Miyato
et al., 2017). Text is typically generated from these models by sampling from a distribution that is
conditioned on the previous word and a hidden state that consists of a representation of the words
generated so far. These are typically trained with maximum likelihood in an approach known as
teacher forcing, where ground-truth words are fed back into the model to be conditioned on for
generating the following parts of the sentence. This causes problems when, during sample generation,
the model is often forced to condition on sequences that were never conditioned on at training time.
This leads to unpredictable dynamics in the hidden state of the RNN. Methods such as Professor
Forcing (Lamb et al., 2016) and Scheduled Sampling (Bengio et al., 2015) have been proposed to
solve this issue. These approaches work indirectly by either causing the hidden state dynamics to
become predictable (Professor Forcing) or by randomly conditioning on sampled words at training
time, however, they do not directly specify a cost function on the output of the RNN that encourages
high sample quality. Our proposed method does so.
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) are a framework for training
generative models in an adversarial setup, with a generator generating images that is trying to fool a
discriminator that is trained to discriminate between real and synthetic images. GANs have had a lot
of success in producing more realistic images than other approaches but they have only seen limited
use for text sequences. This is due to the discrete nature of text making it infeasible to propagate the
gradient from the discriminator back to the generator as in standard GAN training. We overcome this
by using Reinforcement Learning (RL) to train the generator while the discriminator is still trained via
maximum likelihood and stochastic gradient descent. GANs also commonly suffer from issues such
1
arXiv:1801.07736v3  [stat.ML]  1 Mar 2018

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
as training instability and mode dropping, both of which are exacerbated in a textual setting. Mode
dropping occurs when certain modalities in the training set are rarely generated by the generator, for
example, leading all generated images of a volcano to be multiple variants of the same volcano. This
becomes a signiﬁcant problem in text generation since there are many complex modes in the data,
ranging from bigrams to short phrases to longer idioms. Training stability is also an issue since unlike
image generation, text is generated autoregressively and thus the loss from the discriminator is only
observed after a complete sentence has been generated. This problem compounds when generating
longer and longer sentences.
We reduce the impact of these problems by training our model on a text ﬁll-in-the-blank or in-ﬁlling
task. This is similar to the task proposed in Bowman et al. (2016) but we use a more robust setup. In
this task, portions of a body of text are deleted or redacted. The goal of the model is to then inﬁll the
missing portions of text so that it is indistinguishable from the original data. While in-ﬁlling text,
the model operates autoregressively over the tokens it has thus far ﬁlled in, as in standard language
modeling, while conditioning on the true known context. If the entire body of text is redacted, then
this reduces to language modeling.
Designing error attribution per time step has been noted to be important in prior natural language GAN
research (Yu et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017). The text inﬁlling task naturally achieves this consideration
since our discriminator will evaluate each token and thus provide a ﬁne-grained supervision signal to
the generator. Consider, for instance, if the generator produces a sequence perfectly matching the data
distribution over the ﬁrst t −1 time-steps, but then produces an outlier token yt, (x1:t−1yt). Despite
the entire sequence now being clearly synthetic as a result of the errant token, a discriminative model
that produces a high loss signal to the outlier token, but not to the others, will likely yield a more
informative error signal to the generator.
This research also opens further inquiry of conditional GAN models in the context of natural language.
In the following sections,
• We introduce a text generation model trained on in-ﬁlling (MaskGAN).
• Consider the actor-critic architecture in extremely large action spaces.
• Consider new evaluation metrics and the generation of synthetic training data.
2
RELATED WORK
Research into reliably extending GAN training to discrete spaces and discrete sequences has been a
highly active area. GAN training in a continuous setting allows for fully differentiable computations,
permitting gradients to be passed through the discriminator to the generator. Discrete elements break
this differentiability, leading researchers to either avoid the issue and reformulate the problem, work
in the continuous domain or to consider RL methods.
SeqGAN (Yu et al., 2017) trains a language model by using policy gradients to train the generator
to fool a CNN-based discriminator that discriminates between real and synthetic text. Both the
generator and discriminator are pretrained on real and fake data before the phase of training with
policy gradients. During training they then do Monte Carlo rollouts in order to get a useful loss signal
per word. Follow-up work then demonstrated text generation without pretraining with RNNs (Press
et al., 2017). Additionally (Zhang et al., 2017) produced results with an RNN generator by matching
high- dimensional latent representations.
Professor Forcing (Lamb et al., 2016) is an alternative to training an RNN with teacher forcing by
using a discriminator to discriminate the hidden states of a generator RNN that is conditioned on
real and synthetic samples. Since the discriminator only operates on hidden states, gradients can be
passed through to the generator so that the hidden state dynamics at inference time follow those at
training time.
GANs have been applied to dialogue generation (Li et al., 2017) showing improvements in adversarial
evaluation and good results with human evaluation compared to a maximum likelihood trained
baseline. Their method applies REINFORCE with Monte Carlo sampling on the generator.
2

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Replacing the non-differentiable sampling operations with efﬁcient gradient approximators (Jang
et al., 2017)has not yet shown strong results with discrete GANs. Recent unbiased and low variance
gradient estimate techniques such as Tucker et al. (2017) may prove more effective.
WGAN-GP (Gulrajani et al., 2017) avoids the issue of dealing with backpropagating through discrete
nodes by generating text in a one-shot manner using a 1D convolutional network. Hjelm et al.
(2017) proposes an algorithmic solution and uses a boundary-seeking GAN objective along with
importance sampling to generate text. In Rajeswar et al. (2017), the discriminator operates directly
on the continuous probabilistic output of the generator. However, to accomplish this, they recast the
traditional autoregressive sampling of the text since the inputs to the RNN are predetermined. Che
et al. (2017) instead optimize a lower-variance objective using the discriminator’s output, rather than
the standard GAN objective.
Reinforcement learning methods have been explored successfully in natural language. Using a
REINFORCE and cross entropy hybrid, MIXER, (Ranzato et al., 2015) directly optimized BLEU
score and demonstrated improvements over baselines. More recently, actor-critic methods in natural
language were explored in Bahdanau et al. (2017) where instead of having rewards supplied by a
discriminator in an adversarial setting, the rewards are task-speciﬁc scores such as BLEU.
Conditional text generation via GAN training has been explored in Rajeswar et al. (2017); Li et al.
(2017).
Our work is distinct in that we employ an actor-critic training procedure on a task designed to provide
rewards at every time step (Li et al., 2017). We believe the in-ﬁlling may mitigate the problem of
severe mode-collapse. This task is also harder for the discriminator which reduces the risk of the
generator contending with a near-perfect discriminator. The critic in our method helps the generator
converge more rapidly by reducing the high-variance of the gradient updates in an extremely high
action-space environment when operating at word-level in natural language.
3
MASKGAN
3.1
NOTATION
Let (xt, yt) denote pairs of input and target tokens. Let <m> denote a masked token (where the
original token is replaced with a hidden token) and let ˆxt denote the ﬁlled-in token. Finally, ˜xt is a
ﬁlled-in token passed to the discriminator which may be either real or fake.
3.2
ARCHITECTURE
The task of imputing missing tokens requires that our MaskGAN architecture condition on information
from both the past and the future. We choose to use a seq2seq (Sutskever et al., 2014) architecture.
Our generator consists of an encoding module and decoding module. For a discrete sequence
x = (x1, · · · , xT ), a binary mask is generated (deterministically or stochastically) of the same length
m = (m1, · · · , mT ) where each mt ∈{0, 1}, selects which tokens will remain. The token at time t,
xt is then replaced with a special mask token <m> if the mask is 0 and remains unchanged if the
mask is 1.
The encoder reads in the masked sequence, which we denote as m(x), where the mask is applied
element-wise. The encoder provides access to future context for the MaskGAN during decoding.
As in standard language-modeling, the decoder ﬁlls in the missing tokens auto-regressively, however,
it is now conditioned on both the masked text m(x) as well as what it has ﬁlled-in up to that point.
The generator decomposes the distribution over the sequence into an ordered conditional sequence
P (ˆx1, · · · , ˆxT | m(x)) = QT
t=1 P(ˆxt|ˆx1, · · · , ˆxt−1, m(x)).
G(xt) ≡P(ˆxt|ˆx1, · · · , ˆxt−1, m(x))
(1)
The discriminator has an identical architecture to the generator1 except that the output is a scalar
probability at each time point, rather than a distribution over the vocabulary size. The discrimi-
nator is given the ﬁlled-in sequence from the generator, but importantly, it is given the original
1We also tried CNN-based discriminators but found that LSTMs performed the best.
3

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Figure 1: seq2seq generator architecture. Blue boxes represent known tokens and purple boxes are
imputed tokens. We demonstrate a sampling operation via the dotted line. The encoder reads in a
masked sequence, where masked tokens are denoted by an underscore, and then the decoder imputes
the missing tokens by using the encoder hidden states. In this example, the generator should ﬁll in
the alphabetical ordering, (a,b,c,d,e).
real context m(x). We give the discriminator the true context, otherwise, this algorithm has a
critical failure mode. For instance, without this context, if the discriminator is given the ﬁlled-in
sequence the director director guided the series, it will fail to reliably identify
the director director bigram as fake text, despite this bigram potentially never appearing in
the training corpus (aside from an errant typo). The reason is that it is ambiguous which of the two oc-
currences of director is fake; the *associate* director guided the series or
the director *expertly* guided the series are both potentially valid sequences.
Without the context of which words are real, the discriminator was found to assign equal probability
to both words. The result, of course, is an inaccurate learning signal to the generator which will not
be correctly penalized for producing these bigrams. To prevent this, our discriminator Dφ computes
the probability of each token ˜xt being real given the true context of the masked sequence m(x).
Dφ(˜xt|˜x0:T , m(x)) = P(˜xt = xreal
t |˜x0:T , m(x))
(2)
In our formulation, the logarithm of the discriminator estimates are regarded as the reward
rt ≡log Dφ(˜xt|˜x0:T , m(x))
(3)
Our third network is the critic network, which is implemented as an additional head off the discrim-
inator. The critic estimates the value function, which is the discounted total return of the ﬁlled-in
sequence Rt = PT
s=t γsrs, where γ is the discount factor at each position in the sequence.2
3.3
TRAINING
Our model is not fully-differentiable due to the sampling operations on the generator’s probability
distribution to produce the next token. Therefore, to train the generator, we estimate the gradient with
respect to its parameters θ via policy gradients (Sutton et al., 2000). Reinforcement learning was ﬁrst
employed to GANs for language modeling in Yu et al. (2017). Analogously, here the generator seeks
to maximize the cumulative total reward R = PT
t=1 Rt. We optimize the parameters of the generator,
θ, by performing gradient ascent on EG(θ)[R]. Using one of the REINFORCE family of algorithms,
we can ﬁnd an unbiased estimator of this as ∇θEG[Rt] = Rt∇θ log Gθ( ˆxt). The variance of this
gradient estimator may be reduced by using the learned value function as a baseline bt = V G(x1:t)
which is produced by the critic. This results in the generator gradient contribution for a single token
ˆxt
∇θEG[Rt] = (Rt −bt)∇θ log Gθ( ˆxt)
(4)
In the nomenclature of RL, the quantity (Rt −bt) may be interpreted as an estimate of the advantage
A(at, st) = Q(at, st) −V (st). Here, the action at is the token chosen by the generator at ≡ˆxt and
2MaskGAN source code available at:
https://github.com/tensorflow/models/tree/
master/research/maskgan
4

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
the state st are the current tokens produced up to that point st ≡ˆx1, · · · , ˆxt−1. This approach is an
actor-critic architecture where G determines the policy π(st) and the baseline bt is the critic (Sutton
& Barto, 1998; Degris et al., 2012).
For this task, we design rewards at each time step for a single sequence in order to aid with credit
assignment (Li et al., 2017). As a result, a token generated at time-step t will inﬂuence the rewards
received at that time step and subsequent time steps. Our gradient for the generator will include
contributions for each token ﬁlled in order to maximize the discounted total return R = PT
t=1 Rt.
The full generator gradient is given by Equation 6
∇θE[R] = Eˆxt∼G
" T
X
t=1
(Rt −bt)∇θ log(Gθ(ˆxt))
#
(5)
= Eˆxt∼G
" T
X
t=1
 T
X
s=t
γsrs −bt
!
∇θ log(Gθ(ˆxt))
#
(6)
Intuitively this shows that the gradient to the generator associated with producing ˆxt will depend on
all the discounted future rewards (s ≥t) assigned by the discriminator. For a non-zero λ discount
factor, the generator will be penalized for greedily selecting a token that earns a high reward at that
time-step alone. Then for one full sequence, we sum over all generated words ˆxt for t = 1 : T.
Finally, as in conventional GAN training, our discriminator will be updated according to the gradient
∇φ
1
m
m
X
i=1
h
logD(x(i))] + log(1 −D(G(z(i))
i
(7)
3.4
ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES FOR LONG SEQUENCES AND LARGE VOCABULARIES
As an aside for other avenues we explored, we highlight two particular problems of this task and
plausible remedies. This task becomes more difﬁcult with long sequences and with large vocabularies.
To address the issue of extended sequence length, we modify the core algorithm with a dynamic task.
We apply our algorithm up to a maximum sequence length T, however, upon satisfying a convergence
criterion, we then increment the maximum sequence length to T + 1 and continue training. This
allows the model to build up an ability to capture dependencies over shorter sequences before moving
to longer dependencies as a form of curriculum learning.
In order to alleviate issues of variance with REINFORCE methods in a large vocabulary size, we
consider a simple modiﬁcation. At each time-step, instead of generating a reward only on the sampled
token, we instead seek to use the full information of the generator distribution. Before sampling,
the generator produces a probability distribution over all tokens G(v) ∀v ∈V. We compute the
reward for each possible token v, conditioned on what had been generated before. This incurs a
computational penalty since the discriminator must now be used to predict over all tokens, but if
performed efﬁciently, the potential reduction in variance could be beneﬁcial.
3.5
METHOD DETAILS
Prior to training, we ﬁrst perform pretraining. First we train a language model using standard
maximum likelihood training. We then use the pretrained language model weights for the seq2seq
encoder and decoder modules. With these language models, we now pretrain the seq2seq model on
the in-ﬁlling task using maximum likelihood, in particular, the attention parameters as described in
Luong et al. (2015). We select the model producing the lowest validation perplexity on the masked
task via a hyperparameter sweep over 500 runs. Initial algorithms did not include a critic, but we
found that the inclusion of the critic decreased the variance of our gradient estimates by an order of
magnitude which substantially improved training.
5

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
4
EVALUATION
Evaluation of generative models continues to be an open-ended research question. We seek heuristic
metrics that we believe will be correlated with human-evaluation. BLEU score (Papineni et al., 2002)
is used extensively in machine translation where one can compare the quality of candidate translations
from the reference. Motivated by this metric, we compute the number of unique n-grams produced
by the generator that occur in the validation corpus for small n. Then we compute the geometric
average over these metrics to get a uniﬁed view of the performance of the generator.
From our maximum-likelihood trained benchmark, we were able to ﬁnd GAN hyperparameter
conﬁgurations that led to small decreases in validation perplexity on O(1)−point. However, we found
that these models did not yield considerable improvements to the sample quality so we abandoned
trying to reduce validation perplexity. One of the biggest advantages of GAN-trained NLP models,
is that the generator can produce alternative, yet realistic language samples, but not be unfairly
penalized by not producing with high likelihood the single correct sequence. As the generator
explores ‘off-manifold’ in the free-running mode, it may ﬁnd alternative options that are valid, but
do not maximize the probability of the underlying sequence. We therefore choose not to focus on
architectures or hyperparameter conﬁgurations that led to small reductions in validation perplexity,
but rather, searched for those that improved our heuristic evaluation metrics.
5
EXPERIMENTS
We present both conditional and unconditional samples generated on the PTB and IMDB data sets at
word-level. MaskGAN refers to our GAN-trained variant and MaskMLE refers to our maximum-
likelihood trained variant. Additional samples are supplied in Appendix B.
5.1
THE PENN TREEBANK (PTB)
The Penn Treebank dataset (Marcus et al., 1993) has a vocabulary of 10,000 unique words. The
training set contains 930,000 words, the validation set contains 74,000 words and the test set contains
82,000 words. For our experiments, we train on the training partition.
We ﬁrst pretrain the commonly-used variational LSTM language model with parameter dimensions
common to MaskGAN following Gal & Ghahramani (2016) to a validation perplexity of 78. After
then loading the weights from the language model into the MaskGAN generator we further pretrain
with a masking rate of 0.5 (half the text blanked) to a validation perplexity of 55.3. Finally, we then
pretrain the discriminator on the samples produced from the current generator and real training text.
5.1.1
CONDITIONAL SAMPLES
We produce samples conditioned on surrounding text in Table 1. Underlined sections of text are
missing and have been ﬁlled in via either the MaskGAN or MaskMLE algorithm.
Ground Truth
the next day ’s show <eos> interactive telephone technology has
taken a new leap in <unk> and television programmers are
MaskGAN
the next day ’s show <eos> interactive telephone technology has taken
a new leap in its retail business <eos> a
MaskMLE
the next day ’s show <eos> interactive telephone technology has taken
a new leap in the complicate case of the
Table 1: Conditional samples from PTB for both MaskGAN and MaskMLE models.
6

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
5.1.2
LANGUAGE MODEL (UNCONDITIONAL) SAMPLES
We may also run MaskGAN in an unconditional mode, where the entire context is blanked out, thus
making it equivalent to a language model. We present a length-20 language model sample in Table 2
and additional samples are included in the Appendix.
MaskGAN
oct. N as the end of the year the resignations were approved <eos> the
march N N <unk> was down
Table 2: Language model (unconditional) sample from PTB for MaskGAN.
5.2
IMDB MOVIE DATASET
The IMDB dataset Maas et al. (2011) consists of 100,000 movie reviews taken from IMDB. Each
review may contain several sentences. The dataset is divided into 25,000 labeled training instances,
25,000 labeled test instances and 50,000 unlabeled training instances. The label indicates the
sentiment of the review and may be either positive or negative. We use the ﬁrst 40 words of each
review in the training set to train our models, which leads to a dataset of 3 million words.
Identical to the training process in PTB, we pretrain a language model to a validation perplexity of
105.6. After then loading the weights from the language model into the MaskGAN generator we
further pretrain with masking rate of 0.5 (half the text blanked) to a validation perplexity of 87.1.
Finally, we then pretrain the discriminator on the samples produced from the current generator and
real training text.
5.2.1
CONDITIONAL SAMPLES
Here we compare MaskGAN and MaskMLE conditional language generation ability for the IMDB
dataset.
Ground Truth
Pitch Black was a complete shock to me when I ﬁrst saw it back in
2000 In the previous years I
MaskGAN
Pitch Black was a complete shock to me when I ﬁrst saw it back in 1979
I was really looking forward
MaskMLE
Black was a complete shock to me when I ﬁrst saw it back in 1969 I live
in New Zealand
Table 3: Conditional samples from IMDB for both MaskGAN and MaskMLE models.
5.2.2
LANGUAGE MODEL (UNCONDITIONAL) SAMPLES
As in the case with PTB, we generate IMDB samples unconditionally, equivalent to a language model.
We present a length-40 sample in Table 4 and additional samples are included in the Appendix.
MaskGAN
Positive: Follow the Good Earth movie linked Vacation is a comedy that
credited against the modern day era yarns which has helpful something
to the modern day s best It is an interesting drama based on a story of
the famed
Table 4: Language model (unconditional) sample from IMDB for MaskGAN.
5.3
PERPLEXITY OF GENERATED SAMPLES
As of this date, GAN training has not achieved state-of-the-art word level validation perplexity on
the Penn Treebank dataset. Rather, the top performing models are still maximum-likelihood trained
7

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
Model
Perplexity of IMDB samples under a pretrained LM
MaskMLE
273.1 ± 3.5
MaskGAN
108.3 ± 3.5
Table 5: The perplexity is calculated using a pre-trained language model that is equivalent to the
decoder (in terms of architecture and size) used in the MaskMLE and MaskGAN models. This
language model was used to initialize both models.
models, such as the recent architectures found via neural architecture search in Zoph & Le (2017).
An extensive hyperparameter search with MaskGAN further supported that GAN training does not
improve the validation perplexity results set via state-of-the-art models. However, we instead seek
to understand the quality of the sample generation. As highlighted earlier, a fundamental problem
of generating in free-running mode potentially leads to ‘off-manifold‘ sequences which can result
in poor sample quality for teacher-forced models. We seek to quantitatively evaluate this dynamic
present only during sampling. This is commonly done with BLEU but as shown by Wu et al. (2016),
BLEU is not necessarily correlated with sample quality. We believe the correlation may be even less
in the in-ﬁlling task since there are many potential valid in-ﬁllings and BLEU would penalize valid
ones.
Instead, we calculate the perplexity of the generated samples by MaskGAN and MaskMLE by using
the language model that was used to initialize MaskGAN and MaskMLE. Both MaskGAN and
MaskMLE produce samples autoregressively (free-running mode), building upon the previously
sampled tokens to produce the distribution over the next.
The MaskGAN model produces samples which are more likely under the initial model than the
MaskMLE model. The MaskMLE model generates improbable sentences, as assessed by the initial
language model, during inference as compounding sampling errors result in a recurrent hidden states
that are never seen during teacher forcing (Lamb et al., 2016). Conversely, the MaskGAN model
operates in a free-running mode while training and this supports that it is more robust to these
sampling perturbations.
5.4
MODE COLLAPSE
In contrast to image generation, mode collapse can be measured by directly calculating certain n-gram
statistics. In this instance, we measure mode collapse by the percentage of unique n-grams in a set of
10,000 generated IMDB movie reviews. We unconditionally generate each sample (consisting of 40
words). This results in almost 400K total bi/tri/quad-grams.
Model
% Unique bigrams
% Unique trigrams
% Unique quadgrams
LM
40.6
75.2
91.9
MaskMLE
43.6
77.4
92.6
MaskGAN
38.2
70.7
88.2
Table 6: Diversity statistics within 1000 unconditional samples of PTB news snippets (20 words
each).
The results in Table 6 show that MaskGAN does show some mode collapse, evidenced by the reduced
number of unique quadgrams. However, all complete samples (taken as a sequence) for all the
models are still unique. We also observed during RL training an initial small drop in perplexity on
the ground-truth validation set but then a steady increase in perplexity as training progressed. Despite
this, sample quality remained relatively consistent. The ﬁnal samples were generated from a model
that had a perplexity on the ground-truth of 400. We hypothesize that mode dropping is occurring
near the tail end of sequences since generated samples are unlikely to generate all the previous words
correctly in order to properly model the distribution over words at the tail. Theis et al. (2016) also
shows how validation perplexity does not necessarily correlate with sample quality.
8

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
5.5
HUMAN EVALUATION
Ultimately, the evaluation of generative models is still best measured by unbiased human evaluation.
Therefore, we evaluate the quality of the generated samples of our initial language model (LM),
the MaskMLE model and the MaskGAN model in a blind heads-up comparison using Amazon
Mechanical Turk. Note that these models have the same number of parameters at inference time. We
pay raters to compare the quality of two extracts along 3 axes (grammaticality, topicality and overall
quality). They are asked if the ﬁrst extract, second extract or neither is higher quality.
Preferred Model
Grammaticality %
Topicality %
Overall %
LM
15.3
19.7
15.7
MaskGAN
59.7
58.3
58.0
LM
20.0
28.3
21.7
MaskMLE
42.7
43.7
40.3
MaskGAN
49.7
43.7
44.3
MaskMLE
18.7
20.3
18.3
Real samples
78.3
72.0
73.3
LM
6.7
7.0
6.3
Real samples
65.7
59.3
62.3
MaskGAN
18.0
20.0
16.7
Table 7: A Mechanical Turk blind heads-up evaluation between pairs of models trained on IMDB
reviews. 100 reviews (each 40 words long) from each model are unconditionally sampled and
randomized. Raters are asked which sample is preferred between each pair. 300 ratings were obtained
for each model pair comparison.
Preferred model
Grammaticality %
Topicality %
Overall %
LM
32.0
30.7
27.3
MaskGAN
41.0
39.0
35.3
LM
32.7
34.7
32.0
MaskMLE
37.3
33.3
31.3
MaskGAN
44.7
33.3
35.0
MaskMLE
28.0
28.3
26.3
SeqGAN
38.7
34.0
30.7
MaskMLE
33.3
28.3
27.3
SeqGAN
31.7
34.7
32.0
MaskGAN
43.3
37.3
37.0
Table 8: A Mechanical Turk blind heads-up evaluation between pairs of models trained on PTB. 100
news snippets (each 20 words long) from each model are unconditionally sampled and randomized.
Raters are asked which sample is preferred between each pair. 300 ratings were obtained for each
model pair comparison.
The Mechanical Turk results show that MaskGAN generates superior human-looking samples to
MaskMLE on the IMDB dataset. However, on the smaller PTB dataset (with 20 word instead of 40
word samples), the results are closer. We also show results with SeqGAN (trained with the same
network size and vocabulary size) as MaskGAN, which show that MaskGAN produces superior
samples to SeqGAN.
9

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
6
DISCUSSION
Our work further supports the case for matching the training and inference procedures in order to
produce higher quality language samples. The MaskGAN algorithm directly achieves this through
GAN-training and improved the generated samples as assessed by human evaluators.
In our experiments, we generally found training where contiguous blocks of words were masked
produced better samples. One conjecture is that this allows the generator an opportunity to explore
longer sequences in a free-running mode; in comparison, a random mask generally has shorter
sequences of blanks to ﬁll in, so the gain of GAN-training is not as substantial. We found that policy
gradient methods were effective in conjunction with a learned critic, but the highly active research on
training with discrete nodes may present even more stable training procedures.
We also found the use of attention was important for the in-ﬁlled words to be sufﬁciently conditioned
on the input context. Without attention, the in-ﬁlling would ﬁll in reasonable subsequences that
became implausible in the context of the adjacent surrounding words. Given this, we suspect another
promising avenue would be to consider GAN-training with attention-only models as in Vaswani et al.
(2017).
In general we think the proposed contiguous in-ﬁlling task is a good approach to reduce mode
collapse and help with training stability for textual GANs. We show that MaskGAN samples on a
larger dataset (IMDB reviews) is signiﬁcantly better than the corresponding tuned MaskMLE model
as shown by human evaluation. We also show we can produce high-quality samples despite the
MaskGAN model having much higher perplexity on the ground-truth test set.
