GECKA3D:
A 3D Game Engine for Commonsense Knowledge Acquisition
Erik Cambria
School of Computer Engineering
Nanyang Technological University

Tam V. Nguyen
ARTIC Research Center
Singapore Polytechnic

Brian Cheng
ARTIC Research Center
Singapore Polytechnic

Kenneth Kwok
Institute of High Performance Computing
Agency for Science, Technology and Research

Jose Sepulveda
ARTIC Research Center
Singapore Polytechnic

Abstract
Commonsense knowledge representation and reasoning is
key for tasks such as artiﬁcial intelligence and natural lan-
guage understanding. Since commonsense consists of in-
formation that humans take for granted, gathering it is
an extremely difﬁcult task. In this paper, we introduce a
novel 3D game engine for commonsense knowledge acquisi-
tion (GECKA3D) which aims to collect commonsense from
game designers through the development of serious games.
GECKA3D integrates the potential of serious games and
games with a purpose. This provides a platform for the ac-
quisition of re-usable and multi-purpose knowledge, and also
enables the development of games that can provide entertain-
ment value and teach players something meaningful about the
actual world they live in.
Introduction
Many existing multimedia annotation and artiﬁcial intelli-
gence systems beneﬁt from large-scale datasets with accu-
rate annotations. For example, 40 participants were gathered
to rate the attractiveness scores for 1240 subjects in Beauty
Sense project (Nguyen et al. 2012; Nguyen et al. 2013a).
In another work, 69 participants were requested to provide
touch saliency for at least 400 images (Ni et al. 2014).
However, constructing such datasets is generally tedious and
labor-intensive, as it involves massive manual-cropping and
hand-labeling. Therefore, games with a purpose (GWAPs)
are a simple yet powerful means to collect useful informa-
tion from players in a way that is entertaining for them. A
GWAP embeds data collection implicitly into the game play-
ing process. It is developed from the human computation
technique which relies on the collaboration of game play-
ers to solve problems. Each player performs a small part
of a massive computation, similar to a processor in a dis-
tributed system. Unlike computer processors, however, hu-
Copyright c⃝2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
mans require a certain incentive to participate in such col-
lective computation. GWAP aims to implicitly embedding
the computational tasks in an enjoyable and attractive games
while guaranteeing correct solutions to the problems.
Over the past few years, many GWAPs (von Ahn and
Dabbish 2004; von Ahn 2006; Russell et al. 2008; Feng
et al. 2012) have been proposed to exploit the brainpower
made available by multitudes of casual gamers to perform
tasks that, despite being relatively easy for humans to com-
plete, are difﬁcult for machines. GWAPs are best known for
image annotation. In the ‘ESP’ game (von Ahn and Dab-
bish 2004), players guess content objects or properties of
random images by typing what they see when it appears on
the screen. Other image annotation games include: Matchin
(Hacker and von Ahn 2009), a two-player game in which
each player is shown two images and asked to click on the
image their partner would prefer, and Phetch (von Ahn et al.
2006), a game that collects explanatory descriptions of im-
ages in order to improve Web accessibility for the visually
impaired. Recently, Purposive Hidden-Object-Game (Feng
et al. 2012) was proposed. It was designed to impercepti-
bly embed localizing objects into an enjoyable game process
thus attracting many people to make voluntary contribution
to annotating images.
Besides images, GWAPs have been used for video anno-
tation. For example, OntoTube (Siorpaes and Hepp 2008),
Yahoo’s Videotaggame (van Zwol et al. 2008), and Waisd
(Addis et al. 2010), are all games in which two players have
to quickly agree on a set of tags for the same streaming
YouTube video. GWAPs have also been exploited to auto-
matically tag music tracks with semantic labels. HerdIt (Bar-
rington et al. 2009), for example, asks players to accomplish
various tasks and answer quizzes related to the song they are
listening to. In Tagatune (Law et al. 2007), two players lis-
ten to an audio ﬁle and describe to the other what each is
hearing. Players must then decide whether or not the game
has played the same soundtrack to both participants.
One of the most interesting tasks GWAPs can be used
arXiv:1602.01178v1  [cs.MM]  3 Feb 2016

for is commonsense knowledge acquisition from mem-
bers of the general public (Chklovski 2003; Speer 2007;
Cambria, Xia, and Hussain 2012). One example, Verbosity
(von Ahn, Kedia, and Blum 2006), is a real time quiz game
for collecting commonsense facts. In the game, two players
take different roles at different times: one functions as a nar-
rator, who has to describe a word using templates, while the
other has to guess the word in the shortest time possible. An-
other example is FACTory Game (Lenat and Guha 1989), a
GWAP developed by Cycorp which randomly chooses some
facts and presents them to players in order for them to guess
whether a statement is true or false. A variant of the FAC-
Tory game is the Concept Game on Facebook (Herdagde-
len and Baroni 2010), which collects commonsense knowl-
edge by proposing random assertions to users and asks them
whether the given assertion is meaningful or not.
Questions are very important in collecting commonsense.
Kuo and Hsu (Kuo and Hsu 2011) introduced the problem of
resource-bounded crowdsourcing of commonsense knowl-
edge and proposed an approach to ﬁnd a productive question
set automatically. Another problem with existing GWAPs
is that the information gathered from them is often unre-
cyclable; acquired data is often applicable only to the spe-
ciﬁc stimuli encountered during gameplay. Moreover, such
games often have a fairly low ‘sticky factor’, and are often
unable to engage gamers for more than a couple of minutes.
The fun factor sometimes is not considered during the de-
sign of such a GWAP system.
In this paper, we propose a 3D game engine for com-
monsense knowledge acquisition (GECKA3D), that aims to
overcome the main drawbacks of traditional data-collecting
games by empowering users to create their own GWAPs
and by mining knowledge that is highly reusable and multi-
purpose. In addition, we also consider adding game mech-
anism to enhance the fun factor to engage the players. In
particular, the GECKA3D framework has two modes, editor
and player. The editor mode allows game designers to create
compelling serious games for their peers to play. In doing
so, they gather commonsense knowledge useful for intelli-
gent applications in any ﬁeld requiring in-depth knowledge
of the real world, including reasoning, perception and so-
cial systems simulation (Cambria et al. 2009). Meanwhile,
the player mode is used by players to perform the task. The
framework was built on top of the cocos2d game engine1.
Note that the cocos2d game engine is a suite of open-source,
cross-platform, and game-development tools used by thou-
sands of developers all over the world.
Proposed Framework
An important difference between traditional artiﬁcial intel-
ligence systems and human intelligence is the human abil-
ity to harness commonsense knowledge gathered from a
lifetime of learning and experience to make informed de-
cisions (Cambria, Xia, and Hussain 2012). This allows hu-
mans to adapt easily to novel situations where artiﬁcial in-
telligence fails catastrophically due to a lack of situation-
speciﬁc rules and generalization capabilities. Commonsense
1http://www.cocos2d-x.org
Figure 1: Editor mode. Game designers can drag and drop
objects and characters from the library and specify how
these interact with each other.
knowledge also provides background information enabling
humans to successfully operate in social situations where
such knowledge is typically assumed (Cambria et al. 2015).
To this end, GECKA3D allows users to design compelling
serious games via editor mode. As opposed to traditional
GWAPs, GECKA3D does not limit users to speciﬁc, often
tedious, tasks, but rather gives them the freedom to choose
both the kind and the granularity of knowledge to be en-
coded, through a user-friendly and intuitive interface. Not
just a system for the creation of microgames, GECKA3D is
a serious game engine that aims to give designers the means
to create long adventure games to be played by others.
GECKA3D offers functionalities typical of role-play games
(RPGs), e.g., a question/answer dialogue box enabling com-
munication and the exchange of objects (optionally tied to
correct answers) between players and virtual world inhab-
itants, a library for enriching scenes with useful and yet
visually-appealing objects, backgrounds, characters.
Initial Knowledge Construction
The core elements in the proposed GECKA3D framework
are objects and actions. Their semantics can be speci-
ﬁed through prerequisite-object-action-goal (POAG) quar-
tets. Prerequisites indicate what must be present or have
been done before applying the object or action. Objects in-
dicate states or objects of the world (including emotional
states, e.g., “if I give food to hungry people, their happi-
ness is likely to rise”). Goals in turn specify the speciﬁc
scene goals that are facilitated by that particular POAG quar-
tet. In order to provide designers with initial knowledge, we
ﬁrst build the corpus of Object-Action groups. We consider
verbs as actions whereas nouns can be regarded as objects.
In the initial step of corpus retrieval, we utilized the com-
binations of verbs and nouns as the search terms fed into
Microsoft Bing search engine2 in the form of ‘how to + a
<noun>’. The number of searched results can be consid-
ered as the joint likelihood of the combination of action and
2http://www.bing.com

object. We also integrate boost library3 for semantic parsing.
In the post-processing step, we completed cleaning of verb
and noun corpuses with normalization, e.g., forcing all char-
acters to lowercase, and removing html tags. As a result, we
collect the initial corpus with 1500 nouns and 636 verbs in
English.
Editor Mode
Unlike other serious games or data collection tools (von
Ahn, Liu, and Blum 2006; Russell et al. 2008; Feng et al.
2012; Nguyen et al. 2013b), GECKA3D provides authoring
tools (or so called editor mode) for designers to create the
training scenarios. The editor mode is built in 2.5D which
is similar as 2D graphical projections and simulates the ap-
pearance of being three-dimensional (3D). In other words,
the gameplay is in a 3D video game that is restricted to a 2D
plane or has a virtual camera with a ﬁxed angle.
This is inspired by games such as SimCity4. Figure 1 il-
lustrates the editor mode in being used by a designer. The
designers are able to use the editor to create the training sce-
nario in the form of tile based levels. The GECKA3D frame-
work allows designers to deﬁne actions, objects, and goals.
In case an action or an object is not available in the library,
GECKA3D allows game designers to deﬁne their own cus-
tom items by building shapes from a set of predeﬁned geo-
metric forms or applying transformations to existing items.
This enables the creation of new objects for which there is
no available icon by combining available graphics and pre-
deﬁned shapes, and the use of transformations to create vari-
ous object states, such as a ‘broken cup’. The ability of users
to create their own custom items and actions is key to main-
taining an undisrupted game ﬂow.
Each game has enter/exit portal sprites. The designer has
to deﬁne the starting location of the in-game character. It is
easy for designer to know which portal when deﬁning en-
trance. This feature allows the character to traverse in dif-
ferent levels. As mentioned in (von Ahn 2006), people play
games not because they are personally interested in solv-
ing an instance of a computational problem but because
they wish to be entertained. Therefore, in order to gain the
sticky factor of the game, GECKA3D embeds some game
mechanism. For example, it allows designers to add mon-
sters/zombies to chase the in-game player. Therefore, the
player has to make decision quickly in order to avoid the
pursuers.
Object-Action Combinations
Game designers drag and drop objects and characters from
action/object libraries into scenes. In addition, the designers
can add item combinations and the corresponding outcomes,
for example, orange + blender = orange juice. In particular,
designers can create, load and delete such item combina-
tions. They can specify POAG quartet by grouping objects
with the actions performed over it (Fig. 2). POAG quartets
give us pieces of commonsense information like “the result
of blending an orange with a blender, is orange juice”.
3http://www.boost.org
4https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SimCity
Figure 2: The designers specify the item combination rule.
They also deﬁne the outcome of the combination. Note that
items can be objects or actions.
Towards the goal of improving gameplay, and since we
are mainly interested in typical commonsense knowledge,
POAG quartets associated with a speciﬁc object type are
shared among all the instances of such an object (‘inheri-
tance’). Whenever a game designer associates a POAG to
an object in the scene, that POAG instantly becomes shared
among all the other objects of the same type, no matter if
these are located in different scenes. New instances inherit
this POAG as well. Game designers, however, can create ex-
ceptions of any object type through the creation of new cus-
tom objects. A ‘moldy bread’ custom object, for example,
normally inherits all the POAGs of ‘bread’ but these can be
changed, modiﬁed, or removed at the time of object instan-
tiation without affecting other ‘bread’ type objects.
The POAG speciﬁcation is among the most effective
means to collect commonsense knowledge, given that it is
performed quite often by the game designer during the cre-
ation of scenes. From a simple POAG deﬁnition we may
obtain a large amount of knowledge, including interaction
semantics between different objects, prerequisites of ac-
tions, and the goals commonly associated with such actions.
These pieces of commonsense knowledge, are very clearly-
structured, and thus easy to assimilate into the knowledge
base, due to the ﬁxed framework for deﬁning interaction se-
mantics.
Player Mode
Besides allowing for the acquisition of knowledge from
game designers, GECKA3D enables players of the ﬁnished
games to be educated in useful ways, all while being enter-
tained.
In particular, the players use the player mode to control
the in-game character to fulﬁll the predeﬁned goals. The

Figure 3: Status of an in-game character in the scene. The in-
game character has to fulﬁll the goal of the game, meanwhile
he has to avoid the attack of the embedded zombies.
gameplay is also built in 2.5D as similar as the editor mode.
As aforementioned, the player has to make decisions quickly
to avoid the zombies or monsters. The in-game rooms and
corridors are randomly generated to make sure the play-
ers have no bias about the spatial layout. Inspired by other
games such as Diablo5, only a small portion of view close
to in-game character is revealed. The more the character
moves, the clearer vision the player achieves. We also uti-
lize the path ﬁnding algorithm for player movement and ex-
plorer. When the user clicks to one point in the map, the
system automatically ﬁnds the shortest path from the user’s
current position and the target point. The in-game zombies
are inserted to put pressure on the player. Note that the zom-
bies chase the player in a turn based manner.
Server
Server
is
yet
another
important
component
of
the
GECKA3D framework. It is used to store all of the informa-
tion of the gameplay. The core functionality include game
data uploading from remote clients to server. Note that our
editor mode and player mode are deployed in many plat-
forms thanks to the cross-platform characteristic of the cho-
sen game engine. In particular, we use mongoDB and nodejs
for server behavior. Http requests are integrated into mobile
communication. Data can be transferred from phone to ar-
bitrary server on internet. All the history of game making
from the designers and gameplay from the players is stored
for further analysis.
Evaluation
In order to perform a preliminary evaluation of the type
and quality of knowledge that GECKA3D can potentially
gather, we tested it on 20 university students and staff, who
were given the game on tablet and were asked to design a
few game scenes over the span of a few hours.Game de-
signers’ actions were collected and encoded according to
5https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diablo (video game)
Figure 4: A sample XML output deriving from the creation
of a scene in GECKA3D. Actions are collected and encoded
according to their semantics.
a speciﬁc XML format that encodes the semantics associ-
ated with such actions (Fig. 4). Speciﬁc procedures translate
these XML ﬁles into pieces of common-sense knowledge
to be fed to the SenticNet framework (Cambria and Hus-
sain 2015). Such pieces of commonsense knowledge were
manually evaluated (reasonable VS unreasonable) by 5 an-
notators, resulting in an accuracy of 85.7%. They also were
asked to try the predeﬁned games on the player mode. 18
out of 20 participants highly appreciate the playability and
interestingness of the provided player mode which is crucial
for attracting enough players to contribute to the embedded
human computing. The other two only care about ﬁnishing
a task as in traditional GWAPs. More tests are due to verify
how such new pieces of common-sense knowledge actually
improve the reasoning capabilities of the SenticNet frame-
work on speciﬁc tasks such as sentiment analysis.
Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we have introduced the GECKA3D framework
which is used for commonsense knowledge acquisition from
game designers through the development of serious games.
In fact, this not only provides a platform for the acquisition

Item
Action
Prereq.
Outcome
Goal
blender
blend
orange
orange
juice
quench
thirst
bread
cut
knife
bread
slices
–
bread
slices
stack
cheese, ham
sandwich
satisfy
hunger
coffee
beans
hit
pestle
coffee
powder
–
coffee
maker
ﬁll
coffee
powder,
boiled water
coffee
–
kettle
ﬁll
water
boiled
water
–
chair
hit
hammer
wood
pieces
–
can
open
can opener
food
satisfy
hunger
towel
cut
scissors
bandage
–
bag
ﬁll
sand
sandbag
ﬂood
control
Table 1: List of most common POAG triples collected during
the pilot testing at Singapore Polytechnic.
of commonsense knowledge, but also enables the develop-
ment of games that transfer back the meaningful lessons to
gamers. In the future, we aim to update the gameplay, incen-
tives, and interfaces based on analysis of the data resulting
from the game, leading to further understanding of the game
itself as well as the nexus between game enjoyment and
knowledge generation, e.g., ﬁnding out what makes provid-
ing information fun or what kinds of information are more
‘fun’ than others.
