cba
Hamann et al. (Hrsg.): W6: Text Mining and Generation (TMG-2022),
Lecture Notes in Informatics (LNI), Gesellschaft für Informatik, Bonn 2017 1
IRT2: Inductive Linking and Ranking in Knowledge Graphs
of Varying Scale
Felix Hamann1, Adrian Ulges1, Maurice Falk1
Abstract: We address the challenge of building domain-specific knowledge models for industrial use
cases, where labelled data and taxonomic information is initially scarce. Our focus is on inductive link
prediction models as a basis for practical tools that support knowledge engineers with exploring text
collections and discovering and linking new (so-called open-world) entities to the knowledge graph.
We argue that – though neural approaches to text mining have yielded impressive results in the past
years – current benchmarks do not reflect the typical challenges encountered in the industrial wild
properly. Therefore, our first contribution is an open benchmark coined IRT2 (inductive reasoning
with text) that (1) covers knowledge graphs of varying sizes (including very small ones), (2) comes
with incidental, low-quality text mentions, and (3) includes not only triple completion but also ranking,
which is relevant for supporting experts with discovery tasks.
We investigate two neural models for inductive link prediction, one based on end-to-end learning
and one that learns from the knowledge graph and text data in separate steps. These models compete
with a strong bag-of-words baseline. The results show a significant advance in performance for the
neural approaches as soon as the available graph data decreases for linking. For ranking, the results
are promising, and the neural approaches outperform the sparse retriever by a wide margin.
Keywords: Text Mining; Knowledge Graphs; NLP.
1
Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KG) are known to be powerful tools in various applications such as web
search or personal assistants. They are key to addressing complex information needs that
require reasoning and cannot be answered with simple text matching. Usually, knowledge
graphs are assumed to be available at large scale [Ho21], examples include the Linked Open
Data Cloud2 or KGs in biomedicine [HSG15]. However, knowledge graphs may also be
interesting in other industries where no large-scale knowledge exists yet, be it in the technical
service, where KGs can help reason about the root causes of machine failures, in insurance,
where they can model the details of a contract, or in finance rating, where they capture
businesses’ supply chains. Explicit knowledge is scarce in these domains. However, what
is often commonly available in abundance is text data, such as service tickets, insurance
claims, or business reports.
1 RheinMain University of Applied Sciences, Wiesbaden, Germany

2 https://lod-cloud.net
arXiv:2301.00716v1  [cs.LG]  2 Jan 2023

2 Felix Hamann, Adrian Ulges, Maurice Falk
text collection (contexts)
knowledge graph
STEP I: RANKING
STEP II: LINKING
? profession Author
!
Stephen Fry ? ?
(1) query text for 
relevant contexts
...Dawn French and Stephen Fry.
Tolkien also based elements of his...
…together with Walter Moers...
...by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle in 1912...
1
2
3
4
(2) query KG
for relevant facts
Stephen Fry profession Author
1
Stephen Fry place of birth Hampstead
2
Stephen Fry religion Atheism
3
Stephen Fry profession Screenwriter
4
Fig. 1: Our two-step approach towards interactive knowledge acquisition: First, the user discovers
sentences containing relevant entities (Discovery/Ranking, left). Second, given a mention of interest,
triples for this mention are suggested as if it was an entity (Linking, right).
The focus of this paper is to support experts with building knowledge graphs by inspecting
text. To do so, we assume that the expert adds triples to the graph in an iterative process, in
which he/she locates and identifies new entities in the text collection and links them to the
graph. We address two key steps of this process, as illustrated in Figure 1:
1.
Discovery/Ranking: The expert explores the text collection based on a partial fact
of the KG (i.e. a relation-vertex tuple). He/she specifies an information need (such
as “find me actors”, or more specifically “find sentences likely to contain mentions
of entities which have the relation profession with the known entity actor”). The
system returns a ranked list of potentially interesting sentences, giving rise to a
ranking task.
2.
Linking: The expert studies the sentences. Once he/she has discovered an interesting
entity 𝑥(such as Frances McDormand), we would like to link 𝑥to the graph by
adding triples, not only via the profession relation but also via other relations (such
as the birthplace, languages she speaks, or movies she appeared in). To do so, the
system collects textual evidence on the entity in form of other mentions in the text
collection. From those, it infers triples that link 𝑥to the knowledge graph.
We address both tasks using embedding-based semi-inductive [Al21] open-world [SW17]
link prediction, which is targeted at predicting the likelihood of triples (ℎ, 𝑟, 𝑡). In contrast
to standard link prediction, semi-inductive link prediction addresses new entities to be
linked to the known graph and the open-world scenario connotes that the new entities are
solely described via free text.
Since domain-specific data is often confidential, link prediction research employs open
data from graphs such as Freebase [Bo08] or Wikidata [VK14]. We argue that the insight

IRT2 - F. Hamann et al. 3
these benchmarks offer for industrial knowledge acquisition is limited, and contribute a new
benchmark called Inductive Reasoning with Text V2 (IRT2) with the following benefits3:
(1) To assess models at different stages of graph construction, we benchmark on graphs
of varying size. (2) While text contexts in other datasets consist of concise descriptions of
entities, text in practice contains rather incidental mentions of entities. We sample our text
data accordingly. (3) To our knowledge, our study is the first to not only address the linking
task but also the ranking task.
We evaluate three inductive link models on IRT2: One baseline based on keyword matching,
and two neural models that combine a transformer text encoder with a link predictor. We
show that the end-to-end approach and separate training both work well, while the latter
generally performs a little better (even for small graphs). Also, only through evaluation on
smaller graphs, the baseline model is outperformed when linking, which favours the neural
models in scenarios where structured data becomes sparse.
2
Related Work
Link Prediction Models: Closed-world link prediction (or also knowledge graph completion,
KGC) has attracted interest in the research community over the past years. Earlier approaches
such as RESCAL [NTK11], TransE [Bo13], and DistMult [Ya14] laid the foundations for
many following completion models such as ComplEx [Tr16], ConvE [De18a], RotatE [Su19],
or KBGAT [Na19]. We are, however, interested in open-world scenarios, where, given a
textual description of an entity, geometric reasoning is applied through the alignment of
dense graph- and text-representations. This combines KGC—which aims at the prediction
of missing links between existing entities—with language modelling [Mi13, Bo16, De18b]
which produces dense vector representations for natural language text. Specifically, in this
work, a semi-inductive setting [Al21] is studied, where out-of-kg entities are to be linked to
an existing graph using their textual description. One of the first approaches to combining
language- and graph-reasoning models is NTN [So13], where entity description embeddings
are trained to be similar if their entities are connected in the KG. Later approaches build on
this idea: DKRL [Xi16], ConMask [SW17], MIA [Fu20], and KEPLER [Wa21] introduce
models that jointly learn the connection between entity and graph representations. A different
approach decouples the KGC scorer and text encoder such that first the scorer is trained
independently and in a separate step a projection from text-based entity descriptions to
their associated graph-based embeddings is learned [Sh19, SVU20, ZSH20]. We study and
compare both approaches with the models described in Sect. 4. Highly related to our work
is the recently published approach by Daza et al [DCG21]. Here, a BERT model (BLP)
is trained to directly score KGC triples for plausibility using the textual representations
instead of training a separate entity embedding. However, we cannot rely on high quality
text and thus a separate entity embedding tuned with many different observations for input
text is more suitable.
3 The data is publicly available under https://github.com/lavis-nlp/irt2

4 Felix Hamann, Adrian Ulges, Maurice Falk
KGC Benchmarks: Closed-world KGC models are usually evaluated on subsets of publicly
available knowledge graphs such as Freebase [Bo08], DBPedia [Au07] or Wikidata [VK14].
Famous benchmarks include FB15K [Bo13], succeeded by FB15k237 [TC15] due to
test-leakage, WN18, succeeded by WN18RR [De18a], or CoDEx [SK20], among others.
Open-world KGC combines KGs with textual descriptions of its entities. Approaches include
the FB20K benchmark as part of DKRL [Xi16], DBPedia50k and DBPedia500k as part
of ConMask [SW17], and FB15k237-OWE as part of OWE [Sh19]. More recent work
introduces Wikidata5M [Wa21] (a large Wikidata subset) and the FB15k237/WN18RR
adaptions of [DCG21]. Since data in industrial use cases is not publicly available, we
also sample our benchmark data from open knowledge graphs (CoDEx) and text sources
(Wikipedia). However, all the above benchmarks tackle the open-world scenario with a
single concise description of graph entities. We are, however, interested in linking entities
associated with many, noisy text contexts. To our knowledge, the only benchmark to attempt
this is IRT [Ha21]. Here, a a set of 30 text contexts with incidental mentions is associated
with each entity in the knowledge graph. We extend this benchmark by offering more text,
multiple graph sizes, a greater variety of mentions, and evaluation protocols for both ranking
and linking.
3
Problem Description
We define a knowledge graph (KG) as a directed graph G = (V, R, T, M, C) where V
is the set of vertices 𝑣(e.g. 𝑣= Fargo) and R a set of relation types (e.g. 𝑟= genre).
Triples (ℎ, 𝑟, 𝑡) ∈T ⊆V × R × V connect the vertices, e.g. (Fargo, genre, Thriller
Film). Additionally, the set M contains textual mentions, each associated with a vertex
via a function 𝑀: V ↦→P(M). For example, the entity v=Thriller Film has the
mentions M(v) = { “crime thriller”, . . . , “gangster film” }. Note that mentions can be
ambiguous (e.g. “the film” as mention of Fargo). Furthermore, each of the mentions
𝑚is assumed to occur in textual context sentences 𝑐from a corpus C. In general, these
contexts do not express triples but solely contain incidental mentions of entities. They are
accessible through a function 𝐶: V × M ↦→P(C). For example, with 𝑣= Crime Film
and 𝑚= “gangster film”: 𝐶(𝑣, 𝑚) = { “Corman called it the most accurate, authentic
gangster film” , . . . }. Note that – via M and C – we can access an entity’s mentions and
contexts, and vice versa.
Open/Closed-World: While the text corpus C contains known (or "closed-world") entities,
a second corpus Q contains undiscovered open-world mentions M𝑜. Our goal is to
discover these and link them to the graph. We define a closed-world graph G𝑐(containing
subsets of the respective sets of G and the text corpus C) and an open-world graph
G𝑜= (V𝑜, R, T 𝑜, M𝑜, Q) with V𝑜⊆V, T 𝑜⊆T, M𝑜= M \ M𝑐: Namely a graph
with a set of undiscovered mentions not known in the closed-world graph G𝑐. This gives
rise to the two tasks we address:

IRT2 - F. Hamann et al. 5
Ranking Task: The first task is to retrieve text contexts from Q which contain mentions of
interest, i.e. unknown mentions of (possibly unseen) entities which should complete a given
entity-relation pair. For example, for relation 𝑟= genre and tail 𝑡= crime film, we search
for text contexts where any crime films are mentioned.
Linking Task: Now, given an open-world mention was just discovered and marked, all
text contexts of Q are bundled by mention. For each such bundle of text, links 𝑟∈R to
the graph vertices 𝑉𝑐must be found. For example: “What genre is associated with all text
contexts that contain the mention fargo?”.
4
Models
We tackle the above tasks with three models: (1) JOINT, where a text encoder and a
knowledge graph completion (KGC) scorer are trained jointly, (2) OWE, where an encoder
learns to project text representations into a pre-trained graph embedding space, and (3)
BOW, a model that employs bag-of-words representations for text similarity. All three
models are evaluated on both the ranking and linking tasks. Note that, although our notation
is (for brevity) generally focused on finding tails, we do also always include head-prediction
for given relation-tail pairs.
4.1
Neural Models
Both neural models combine a text encoder 𝜙and a KGC module 𝜓(see Fig. 2). As a text
encoder, we use a pre-trained BERT [De18b], a popular state of the art transformer [Va17]
encoder. Given a text context 𝑐, we run it through the encoder and select the [CLS]-
token embedding as the context representation 𝜙(𝑐)CLS ∈R𝑑′ (following the observations
of [Ha21]). This representation is mapped using a learned affine projection (𝑊, b) into
a complex-valued space, obtaining a representation c. The representation is then used to
estimate a tripel’s plausibility. We use the ComplEx scorer [Tr16], which, given complex-
valued context, relation and tail embeddings c, r, v ∈C𝑑, calculates the plausibility score as
𝜓(𝑐, 𝑟, 𝑣) = Re(c⊙r⊙v). Note that—since the projection maps from real-valued to complex
space—we choose the matrix and bias vector dimensions accordingly (𝑊∈R𝑑′×2𝑑, b ∈R2𝑑).
Overall, our neural models can be written as:
𝑠(𝑐, 𝑟, 𝑣) = 𝜓( 𝑊· 𝜙(𝑐)CLS + b
|              {z              }
c
, r, v )
(1)
Multi-Context Extension As discussed above, instead of a single context 𝑐, a set Σ of
multiple contexts may be available describing the same entity. We would like our entity
representations to take the whole set Σ into account. To do so, we use a simple early fusion
that averages the text representations before projecting them:
c = 𝑊·
 
1
|Σ|
∑︁
𝑐∈Σ
𝜙(𝑐)CLS
!
+ b
(2)

6 Felix Hamann, Adrian Ulges, Maurice Falk
ψ
kgc 
scorer
ɸ
text encoder
BERT
parameters
graph
embeddings
v, r
ℒ
cross
entropy
projection
W, b
text contexts
c
text-based
representation
end-to-end gradient flow
1. joint training
    (JOINT)
2. separate training
    (OWE)
(2a) train link prediction
(2b) align text and graph
representations ( c ≈ v )
Fig. 2: Data flow in our model (top) and the two training strategies (bottom): Strategy 1 (JOINT)
applies an end-to-end training of both link predictor and text encoder. Strategy 2 (OWE) first trains
the link predictor (2a), and then aligns the text-based entity representations c with the graph-based
ones v (2b). Learnable parameters are highlighted in orange.
We then use the resulting representation c as a drop-in replacement in Equation (1).
Concerning training, we use two variants of this setup: In the first variant (referred to as
single), training happens on individual contexts as in Equation (1), but we apply Equation
(2) in inference. In the second variant (multi), we apply Equation (2) both in training and
inference.
Training
As illustrated in Figure 2, we study two different training strategies to fit the model parameters
(text encoder 𝜙, projection 𝑊, b, and knowledge graph embeddings r, v). Our first approach
uses a joint (end-to-end) training (JOINT): We iteratively sample a random entity 𝑣from
the knowledge graph. For 𝑣, we draw a random triple (𝑣, 𝑟, 𝑣′) and context 𝑐. The model’s
scores 𝑠(𝑐, 𝑟, 𝑣′) are mapped to a probability distribution using a softmax, and we apply a
cross-entropy loss:
LJOINT = −
∑︁
𝑣′∈V𝑐
 
log
exp(𝑠(𝑐, 𝑟, 𝑣′))
Í
𝑢′∈V𝑐exp(𝑠(𝑐, 𝑟, 𝑢′))
!
· 1(𝑣,𝑟,𝑣′) ∈T
(3)
Note that – though the above notation samples triples (𝑣, 𝑟, 𝑣′) to predict tails 𝑣′ – we also
sample triples (𝑣′, 𝑟, 𝑣) and predict the heads 𝑣′ accordingly.
Our second approach follows Shah et al’s OWE model [Sh19] and applies a separate
training. Here, training happens in two steps: First, the link prediction model 𝜓is trained on
the closed-world graph, obtaining a graph-based embedding space. Second, the text encoder
𝜙and projection (𝑊, b) are trained to align entities’ text-based representations with the
(now fixed) graph-based ones. To do so, we reduce the geometric distance between context

IRT2 - F. Hamann et al. 7
representations c = 𝑊· 𝜙(𝑐)𝐶𝐿𝑆+ b and their associated graph-based representations, using
a mean squared error loss:
LOWE = 1
2𝑑·
∑︁
0<𝑖≤𝑑
 Re(c𝑖) −Re(v𝑖)2 +  Im(c𝑖) −Im(v𝑖)2
(4)
Inference: This section outlines how the neural models are used in our two tasks. First,
in ranking, a closed-world entity 𝑣and a relation of interest 𝑟are given, and the task is
to retrieve a ranked list of text contexts from the query corpus Q that potentially contain
mentions of relevant open-world entities to be identified by the expert. To do so, we compute
the single-context scores 𝑠(𝑐, 𝑟, 𝑣) for all contexts 𝑐∈𝑄, 𝑟∈R and 𝑣∈V𝑐. The scores are
normalized per relation using the softmax function as to better compare the independently
scored contexts 𝑐(the raw ComplEx scores are unbounded). The contexts in the query
corpus are then ranked by this normalized score.
Second, in linking, the expert is interested in a certain mention of interest 𝑚∈M𝑜
representing an open-world entity. His/her goal is to link said entity to the graph. To do so,
he/she selects a relation 𝑟∈R and collects a set of contexts Σ containing 𝑚to describe
the open-world entity. Using the contexts, all entity candidates 𝑣∈V𝑐are ranked by their
scores 𝑠(Σ, 𝑟, 𝑣). Note that in principle we can repeat this procedure for each relation and
also for predicting heads instead of tails.
4.2
BOW: Bag-of-Words Retrieval
To evaluate the tasks at hand with a common industrial approach, we compare the above
neural models with a bag-of-words approach. Given one or several mentions, this approach
concatenates text contexts containing the mentions into documents and then conducts a
similarity matching between documents using the well-known BM25[RW94] keyword
matching implemented by the Elasticsearch search engine4.
Ranking: Given an entity relation pair such as 𝑣= Thriller Film, 𝑟= genre (“Find text
contexts which mention thriller films”), the baseline’s strategy is to find open-world entities
that are similar to known closed-world entities 𝑣′ for which (𝑣′, 𝑟, 𝑣) holds (i.e., known
thriller films). We sample a set of random representatives 𝑣′ and some of their associated
text contexts. These contexts are concatenated into a document which is then used as a
query against an index containing all open-world contexts Q.
Linking: Given a mention 𝑚∈M𝑜and a relation 𝑟, we sample contexts containing 𝑚into
a document 𝐷(𝑚), which is used to query against an index containing documents 𝐷(𝑣) for
all closed-world vertices 𝑣∈V𝑐. The top-n predicted results allow us to compile a set of
4 https://www.elastic.co

8 Felix Hamann, Adrian Ulges, Maurice Falk
reference vertices which we use as blueprints for prediction. For example: When searching
for 𝑟= profession of text contexts containing “s. a. corey” (“Predict the profession of the
text contexts containing s. a. corey”), the result list may contain other texts describing
authors. The final prediction of vertices is compiled from the retrieved vertices targets of
relation 𝑟and scored by the inverse of the position of the document in the result list.
5
Benchmark Construction
Our benchmark picks up the work of [Ha21] and extends it: (1) We study the behaviour of
models with varying knowledge graph size, and particularly for small graphs, (2) we test
models for both the ranking and linking task. We offer four variants of the benchmark: tiny,
small, medium, and large. The variants offer different ratios of structural information (i.e.
graph triples) and associated text. The datasets are based on CoDEx-M [SK20] which is
sampled from Wikidata [VK14]. The following steps are executed:
1. Identifying Concept Vertices: We assume that in a real-world scenario world-knowledge
is more likely to be already modelled in the given KG. Information to be discovered is
usually much more volatile. Consider for example a graph for a machine manufacturer. We
know that things can catch fire (the world knowledge) but we aim to find the specific parts
that actually do. A heuristic to identify such world knowledge is based on the assumption
that such entities are characterised by relations which exhibit a strong disproportion
between their heads and tails. The ratio between a relation 𝑟’s domain size (its number
of heads) dom(𝑟) := |{ℎ| ∃𝑡: (ℎ, 𝑟, 𝑡) ∈T }| and the range size (its number of tails)
rg(𝑟) := |{𝑡| ∃ℎ: (ℎ, 𝑟, 𝑡) ∈T }| is min dom(𝑟), rg(𝑟)/max dom(𝑟), rg(𝑟). Per size
variant of the dataset, we select a subset of the relations offered by CoDEx, order by ratio
and select a subset of those to determine concept entities that will remain in the closed-world
split. The appendix in Sect. 9 enumerates all relations and corresponding selections in
greater detail.
2. Sampling Mentions and Text Contexts: As our graph is based on Wikidata, we can
exploit its links to Wikipedia. For each vertex 𝑣, we identify the associated Wikipedia page
𝑝𝑣and all pages which link back to it N (𝑝𝑣). Using the link text of the hyperlinks, we build
the set of mentions which are associated with the vertex 𝑀(𝑣). Lastly, to build the contexts
𝐶(𝑣, 𝑚), all occurrences of the mentions in N (𝑝𝑣) are identified and the surrounding
sentence kept as context. This is a heuristic to obtain incidental text contexts: The entity
is mentioned but usually not the subject of the sentence. As example for 𝑣= Scotland:
“Aberdeen is a city in northeast Scotland”.
3. Open/Closed-World Split: The open/closed-world split, in this case, is not done on vertex
but mention level. We separate the mention set M into a partition M𝑐for closed-world-
and M𝑜for open-world mentions respectively. First, all mentions associated with concept
entities are set aside for the closed-world part. Then, for each remaining vertex 𝑣, its
associated mentions are distributed randomly between open- and closed-world. We set an

IRT2 - F. Hamann et al. 9
additional pruning parameter which limits the maximum amount of mentions allowed for
a closed-world vertex. With the information about closed-world mentions, we identify all
triples whose vertices are associated with them and set them aside as the closed-world triple
set T 𝑐⊆T. The so-called test triples (𝑚∈M𝑜, 𝑟∈R, 𝑣∈V𝑐) (explained below the
table) are derived directly from the triple set T by identifying in which triples the mention’s
vertex occurs. We set aside a subset of the open-world split for validation. The above steps
are executed for the four different dataset variants. These have different parameters set
for concept relations, total relations to keep and closed-world mention pruning (see the
appendix for more details).
Tiny
Small
Medium
Large
Relations |R |
5
12
45
45
Entities |E |
1,174
2,887
3,592
9,952
Training Triples |T𝑐|
2,928
7,527
26,335
102,289
Training Text |C|
9,100,422
15,117,184
17,398,943
18,654,485
Test Text |Q |
6,058,557
2,390,017
1,905,151
864,598
Ranking Queries
695
1,225
4,972
7,336
Linking Queries
47,857
52,654
97,921
48,801
Test Triples
102,866
102,616
174,312
90,780
The last four rows of the table describe the scale of the challenges. A ranking query is a
tuple (𝑣∈V𝑐, 𝑟∈R) (e.g. (writer, profession) – “Find texts with writers in them”) and
an associated ground truth set of open-world mentions {𝑚1, . . . } ∈𝑀𝑜to be discovered (e.g.
{ “Tolkiens”, “the author”, “Corey”, . . . }). A linking query is a tuple (𝑚∈𝑀𝑜, 𝑟∈R)
(e.g. (“Tolkiens”, profession) – “What professions does the entity have, given texts in which
“Tolkiens” occurs?”) and a set of associated closed-world vertices 𝑣∈V𝑐(e.g. { author,
linguist, . . . }). One can see that both ranking and linking are different views of the same
data: unique (𝑚∈𝑀𝑜, 𝑟∈R, 𝑣∈V𝑐) triples. These triples are presented as test triples in
the table above and allow to gauge the ratio of the queries and their associated ground truth.
For example, in the most extreme case, ranking on the tiny variant, has 102866/695 ≈148
mentions to discover per query on average.
6
Experiments
We run a series of experiments to build a solid understanding of the challenge’s difficulty. We
employ all three formerly described models (JOINT, OWE, BOW) for both tasks (ranking,

mean reciprocal rank (MRR) for each test triple (i.e. micro-averaged). Following common
practice, we apply target filtering [Sh19] to the scored predictions (mentions for ranking
and vertices for ranking). Target filtering is a method where, for a given ranking, only a
single true positive of interest is inspected, while all other true positives are removed from
the list. This helps to not artificially worsen the result for rankings with many true positives.

10 Felix Hamann, Adrian Ulges, Maurice Falk
We offer the datasets, dataset creation code, and evaluation protocol online5. The model
implementations and all presented trained models are also supplied separately6. We evaluate
our models on a subset of the test text contexts Q (400k sentences drawn randomly for
ranking; 100 sentences per mention for linking).
6.1
Hyperparameters
We determine the final hyperparameters using a combination of random-, and grid searches
over the parameter space. A single closed-world ComplEx model is trained per dataset split
and commonly used to train the OWE model using Adagrad [DHS11]. The hyperparameters
studied comprise learning rate, L2 regularization weight, and embedding space dimensions.
We employ PyKEEN[Al20] for training and build our own open-world extension. We
implement and train the JOINT and OWE models using PyTorch [Pa19] and PyTorch
Lightning[FT19]. Models are optimized using Adam[KB14]. For each model architecture
and dataset split, we run a random parameter sweep to fix a subset of parameters and
subject the remaining to a grid search. We study the effect of regularization of the entity
and relation embeddings, weight-decay and learning rate of the optimizer, how many layers
of the encoder are frozen during training, how many text contexts are sampled per vertex
per training, and whether the mention is masked during training. Additionally, we study
how many contexts to provide per optimizer step for multi-context models. Generally, all
models share a similar set of values for learning-rate, weight-decay and regularization
weight. The other parameters are dependent on the split. We found to freeze parts of the
encoder works well against overfitting. Contrary to the observations of [Ha21], masking did
not significantly increase model performance. The final hyperparameters are provided in
the appendix (Sect. 9) and with the models online.
6.2
Linking
First, we evaluate the linking task as the designated challenge for the presented models.
Tab. 1 details our findings. Generally, a few trends can be observed: (1) The neural models
significantly outperform the baseline approach on the three smaller variants but yield inferior
results on the large dataset. This supports our claim that a benchmark should offer insights
into varying degrees of structural data scarcity. Even with an abundance of data (usually
favouring neural approaches), the BOW baseline can beat the neural model’s performance
on large but falls short for the smaller variants. (2) Overall, the OWE approach outperforms
JOINT albeit not by a great margin for tiny, small, and large. The biggest performance gap
can be observed on medium, where the OWE model profits the most from the decoupled
training. We argue that this hints towards the need for better sampling/overfitting strategies
5 https://github.com/lavis-nlp/irt2
6 https://github.com/lavis-nlp/irt2m

IRT2 - F. Hamann et al. 11
during training for JOINT as it seems to struggle with the lower variety of mentions
seen during training. (3) Although the multi-context models generally perform better than
the single-context counterparts, the difference in performance is not as pronounced as
reported by [Ha21]. Contrary to their findings we also did not observe much performance
improvement through masking the mention. These observations indicate that both models
struggle to incorporate much of the textual clues and instead rely heavily on the structural
information present in the vertex- and relation embeddings. Overall, the metrics show that
the models can link an entity described by text contexts to a given graph with relatively
high precision.

MRR
Tiny
Small
Med.
Large
Tiny
Small
Med.
Large
BOW
53.82
55.18
46.43
71.38
33.63
34.62
29.81
50.61
JOINT
single
72.06
70.20
47.14
65.75
50.61
45.95
33.72
48.29
JOINT
multi
73.56
74.27
53.77
65.12
51.28
52.39
37.50
45.26
OWE
single
74.09
74.33
61.98
64.27
50.25
50.57
40.60
42.69
OWE
multi
75.39
71.49
64.41
66.36
53.06
47.17
43.25
45.51
Tab. 1: Model performance on the linking task. The bag-of-words model outperforms the neural
approaches on the large dataset. The neural models both outperform the baseline on the smaller
variants by a large margin. Among the neural models, OWE generally yields better performance on all
splits.
6.3
Ranking
Secondly, for ranking, we study whether the models which were originally trained to do

Tab. 2. (1) The results show that the scoring mechanism of the neural models outperforms
the BM25 search results. At first glance, this is a surprising insight, but can be explained
by the nature of text samples. As the mention of interest is usually not the subject of the
text context, the query does not directly describe its properties. This leads the ranker astray.
For example: searching for other comedians (i.e. ?, profession, comedian) the model uses
text samples sampled from the Wikipedia page about New York among others. This leads
to other text samples to be retrieved which also talk about things in the context of New
York but seldom other comedians. This contextualization of queries (by queried relation) is
better considered with the neural models. (2) Overall ranking quality is not high enough for
practical application.
We suspect two main factors which hinder effective ranking: First, the scores are calculated
independently from each other. This makes an intra-sample comparison of scores difficult.
Secondly, the ranking task requires scores first and foremost produced by head prediction.
These scores usually are of lower quality because the models are much better at predicting
a few biased tails (e.g. professions) than hundreds or thousands of volatile heads (e.g.

12 Felix Hamann, Adrian Ulges, Maurice Falk

Tiny
Small
Med.
Large
BOW
2.86
4.29
6.42
14.83
JOINT
single
7.91
6.78
6.37
19.47
JOINT
multi
13.28
16.17
14.38
30.68
OWE
single
6.30
8.19
6.88
10.81
OWE
multi
9.98
13.00
6.36
31.40
Tab. 2: Results for the ranking task. The neural models all outperform the baseline and, contrary to
the linking task, the multi-context JOINT model is generally the best performing approach.
authors). This is worsened by the formerly described observation that text contexts have a
comparatively small influence on the score. To obtain better performance, new approaches
must be devised which incorporate the graph context on the one hand and neural semantic
retrieval [MC17, LNY21] on the other.
7
Conclusion
We present IRT2, a benchmark to study a knowledge acquisition pipeline to extend a
knowledge graph (KG) from noisy text. We offer knowledge graphs of different sizes and
text associated with its vertices. The benchmark comprises two tasks, ranking and linking,
where first, entities need to be discovered from unlabelled text, and in the second stage,
linked to the KG. Alongside, we study three approaches for the tasks at hand: two neural
open-world triple scorers and a bag-of-words model. We found the models to perform well
for the linking task but less so for ranking. For linking, the BOW baseline outperforms the
neural models on the large variant. For the remaining, smaller variants, the OWE approach
outperforms all other approaches even if graph data is scarce. For ranking, the JOINT
model produces the best results. Although the models show a promising direction to be used
for ranking, they do not perform at the level for practical application yet. We recommend
studying how semantic ranking techniques can profit from the given links between graph-
and text data. We invite the community to use the benchmark to (1) devise ways to better
incorporate the noisy but abundant text data to make better predictions, (2) find ways to
contextualize semantic retrievers with the specific graph information, and (3) derive insights
for application in an industrial context with similar constraints and conditions. The dataset
and evaluation scripts can be found here: https://github.com/lavis-nlp/irt2.
Acknowledgement: This work was supported by the BMBF program FH-Kooperativ,
project SCENT (13FH003KX0).

IRT2 - F. Hamann et al. 13
8
