378 
MURPHY & WEISS 
UAI2001 
The Factored Frontier Algorithm for Approximate Inference in 
DBNs 
Kevin Murphy and Yair Weiss 
Computer Science Department 
University of California 
Berkeley, CA 94720-1776 

Abstract 
The Factored Frontier (FF) algorithm is a 
simple approximate inference algorithm for 
Dynamic Bayesian Networks (DBNs). It is 
very similar to the fully factorized version 
of the Boyen-Koller (BK) algorithm, but in­
stead of doing an exact update at every 
step followed by marginalisation (projection), 
it always works with factored distributions. 
Hence it can be applied to models for which 
the exact update step is intractable. We show 
that FF is equivalent to (one iteration of) 
loopy belief propagation (LBP) on the origi­
nal DBN, and that BK is equivalent (to one 
iteration of) LBP on a DBN where we clus­
ter some of the nodes. We then show em­
pirically that by iterating more than once, 
LBP can improve on the accuracy of both 
FF and BK. We compare these algorithms on 
two real-world DBNs: the first is a model of 
a water treatment plant, and the second is a 
coupled HMM, used to model freeway traffic. 
1 
Introduction 
Dynamic Bayesian Networks (DBNs) are directed 
graphical models of stochastic processes. They gener­
alise hidden Markov models (HMMs) by representing 
the hidden (and observed) state in terms of state vari­
ables, which can have complex interdependencies. The 
graphical structure provides an easy way to specify 
these conditional independencies, and hence to pro­
vide a compact parameterization of the modeL See 
Figure 1 for some examples. 
In this paper, we will be concerned with the task of 
offline probabilistic inference in DBNs, i.e., computing 
P(Xfly1,r) fort= 1, . . .  , T and i = 1, . . .  ,N, where 
Xi is the i'th hidden node at timet, and Yt is evidence 
vector at time t; this is often called "smoothing". We 
will assume that all the hidden nodes are discrete and 
each has Q possible values. The observed nodes can 
be discrete or continuous. 
The simplest way to perform exact inference in a 
DBN is to convert the model to an HMM and ap­
ply the forwards-backwards algorithm [18]. This takes 
O(TQ2N) time. By exploiting the conditional inde­
pendencies within a slice, it is possible to reduce this 
to fl(TNQN+F) time, where F is the maximum fan-in 
of any node. Unfortunately, this is still exponential in 
N. In fact, this is nearly always the case (assuming 
the graph is connected), because even if there is no 
direct connection between two nodes in the same or 
neighboring "time slices," they will become correlated 
over time by virtue of sharing common influences in 
the past. Hence, unlike the case for static networks, 
we need to use approximations even for "sparse" mod­
els. 
In Section 3.1, we present a new approximation, called 
the "factored frontier" (FF) algorithm, which repre­
sents the belief state as a product of marginals. The 
FF algorithm is thus very similar to the fully fac­
torized version of the Boyen-Koller (BK) algorithm, 
which we summarise in Section 3.2. FF, however, is a 
more aggressive approximation, and can therefore be 
applied when even BK is intractable: FF will always 
take O(T NQF+l) time, whereas BK can take more, 
depending on the graph. 
In Section 4, we show how both FF and BK are related 
to loopy belief propagation (LBP) [15, 21, 20, 6, 7, 13], 
which is the method of applying Pearl's message pass­
ing algorithm [16] to a Bayes net even if it contains 
(undirected) cycles or loops. In Section 5, we exper­
imentally compare all four algorithms - exact, FF, 
BK and LBP - on a number of problems, and in 
, 
Section 7, we conclude. 

UAI 2001 
MURPHY & WEISS 
379 
a 
b 
Figure 1: Some DBNs. (a) A coupled HMM with N = 5 
chains and T 
= 3 timeslices. 
Clear nodes are hidden, 
shaded nodes are observed. 
In the freeway traffic appli­
cation in Section 5, Xl represents the hidden traffic sta­
tus (free-flowing or congested) at location i on the free­
way at time t; this is assumed to generate a local noisy 
measurement of traffic speed, Yt', and to depend on its 
previous state and the previous state of its upstream and 
downstream neighbors. 
(b) A DBN designed to monitor 
a waste water treatement plant. This model is originally 
from [9], and was modified by [2] to include (discrete) evi­
dence nodes. 
2 
Exact inference 
We start by reviewing the forwards-backwards (FB) 
algorithm [18] for HMMs, and then the frontier algo­
rithm [23] for DBNs, since this will form the basis of 
our generalisation. 
2.1 
The forwards backwards algorithm 
The basic idea of the FB algorithm is to compute 
i def P(X 
.1 
) . 
th £ 
d 
,Bi def 
at = 
t = t Y1:t 
m 
e orwar s pass, t = 
P(Yt+l:rlXt = i) in the backwards pass, and then 
· def 
to combine them to produce the final answer: 'Yt = 
P(Xt 
= i\Yl:T) ex aXf3Y-
Let M(i,j) ĩ P(Xt+l = 
j[Xt = i) be the transition matrix, and Wt(i,i) <f 
P(yt[Xt = i) be a diagonal matrix containing the con­
ditional likelihood of the evidence at time t. 
The 
algorithm is just repated matrix-vector multiplica­
tion. Specifically, in the forwards pass we compute 
at ex WtMT O:'t-1, and in the backwards pass we com­
pute f3t ex MWt+1.8t+l; the constants of proportional­
ity are simply the normalizing constants. The bound­
ary conditions are a1 = W17l" and f3r = 1, where 
7l"; dģ,f P(X1 = i) is the prior. If X can be inS possible 
states, the FB algorithm clearly takes O(S2T) time. 
2.2 
The frontier algorithm 
If Xt is a vector of N hidden nodes, each with Q pos­
sible values, then X can be in S = QN possible states, 
so the FB algorithm becomes intractable. The fron­
tier algorithm [23] is a way of computing a1 from O:'t-l 
(and similarly for the {31's) without needing to form 
the QN x QN transition matrix, yet alone multiply by 
it. 
The basic idea is to "sweep" a Markov blanket across 
the DBN, first forwards and then backwards. We shall 
call the nodes in the Markov blanket the "frontier set", 
and denote it by :F; the nodes to the left and right of 
the frontier will be denoted by £ and 'R. At every 
step of the algorithm, :F d-separates [, and 'R. We 
will maintain a joint distribution over the nodes in :F. 
We can advance the frontier from slice t - 1 to t as 
follows. We move a node from R to :F as soon as all 
its parents are in :F. To keep the frontier as small 
as possible, we move a node from :F to £ as soon 
as all its children are in :F. Adding a node entails 
multiplying its conditional probability table (CPT) 
P(XfiPa(Xf)) onto the frontier, and removing a node 
entails marginalising it out of the frontier. 
This is best explained by example (see Figure 2). Con­
sider the coupled HMM (CHMM) shown in Figure 1. 
The frontier initially contains all the nodes in slice t-1: 
Ft,o <r O:'t-1 = P(Xl.:..'YIY1:t-1)· We then advance the 
frontier by moving Xl from R to :F. To do this, we 
multiply in its CPT P(XllXl_1, Xf-1): 
Ft,l = P(Xf, Xf:_lfiYu-d = P(XfiXf-1, Xf_1) x Ft,o 
Next we add in Xf: 
Ft,2 = P(Xf'2, X[!'fiYl:t-d 
P(X[txf_,,x[_1,Xf_1) x Ft,l 
Now all of the nodes that depend on Xl_1 are in the 
frontier, so we can marginalize Xl_1 out (move it from 
:F to £): 
F. 
P(x1'2 X2'NIY 
) - """ Ft,2 
t,3= 
t' t-1 l:t-1 - L..., 
The process continues in this way until we compute 
Finally, we weight this factor by the likelihood: 
O:t = P(Xf'NIYl:t) oc P(yt\Xf'N) x Ft,N 
It is clear that in this example, exact inference takes 
O(T NQN+2) time and space, since the frontier never 

380 
MURPHY & WEISS 
UA/ 2001 
0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
add Xl(t) 
add X2(t) 
removeXl(t-1) 
add XJ(I) 
remove X2(t-1) 
Figure 2: The frontier algorithm applied to a CHMM; observed leaves are omitted for clarity. Nodes inside the 
box are in the frontier. The node being operated on is shown shaded; only connections with its parents and 
children are shown; other arcs are omitted for clarity. See text for details . 
contains more than N + 2 nodes, and it takes O(N) 
steps to sweep the frontier from t - 1 to t. In general, 
the running time of the frontier algorithm is exponen­
tial in the size of the largest frontier; this quantity 
is also known as the induced width of the underlying 
or moral graph. We would therefore like to keep the 
frontiers as small as possible. Unfortunately, comput­
ing an order in which to add and remove nodes so as 
to minimize the sum of the frontier sizes is equivalent 
to finding an optimal elimination ordering, which is 
known to be NP-hard. Nevertheless, heuristics meth­
ods, such as greedy search [10], often perform as well 
as exhaustive search using branch and bound [23]. 
A special case of the frontier algorithm, applied to fac­
torial HMMs, was published in Appendix B of [8]. (In 
an FHMM, there are no cross links between the hidden 
nodes, so there are no constraints on the order in which 
nodes are added to or removed from the frontier.) For 
regular1 DBNs, the frontier algorithm is equivalent to 
the junction tree algorithm [3, 11, 19] applied to the 
"unrolled" DEN. In particular, the frontier sets cor­
respond to the maximal cliques in the moralized, tri­
angulated graph; in the junction tree, these cliques 
are connected together in a chain, possibly with some 
smaller cliques "hanging off the backbone" to accomo­
date the non-persistent observed leaves. Despite this 
equivalence to junction tree, the frontier algorithm is 
1 A regular DBN has certain restrictions on its topol­
ogy. 
Let Ht denote all the hidden nodes in time-slice t, 
and 01 all the observed nodes. A regular DBN can have 
connections from H1 to 01 and to Ht+!, but to nowhere 
else. In particular, there cannot be any intra-slice connec­
tions within the H1 nodes. Furthermore, we assume each 
node in Ht connects to one or more nodes in Ht+l (i.e., is 
persistent). All the DENs in this paper are regular. 
The frontier algorithm works for non-regular DBNs, but 
it may be less efficient that junction tree in this case. The 
factored frontier and loopy belief propagation algorithms 
also work for non-regular DENs. 
appealingly simple, and will form the basis of the ap­
proximation algorithm discussed in the next section. 
3 
Approximate inference 
3.1 
The factored frontier algorithm 
The problem with the frontier and junction tree algo­
rithms is that they need exponential space just to rep­
resent the belief states, and hence need at least that 
much time to compute them. The idea of the fac­
tored frontier (FF) algorithm is to approximate the 
belief state with a product of marginals: P(Xt IYu)  
f1¨1 P(XfiYt:t). (The backward messages f3t are ap­
proximated in a similar way.) 
The algorithm proceeds as follows: when we add a 
node to the frontier, we multiply its CPT by the prod­
uct of the factors corresponding to its parents; this 
creates a joint distribution for this family. We then 
immediately marginalize out the parent nodes. The 
backwards pass is analogous. This is like the frontier 
algorithm except that we always maintain the joint dis­
tribution over the frontier nodes in factored form. This 
algorithm clearly takes O(T NQF+l) time, no matter 
what the topology. 
3.2 
The Boyen-Koller algorithm 
The Boyen-Koller algorithm [2] represents the belief 
state, O:t = P(Xt!Yt:t), as a product of marginals over 
C "clusters", P(Xt IYI:t)  TIW=l P(XfiYl:t), where Xf 
is a subset of the variables {Xi}. (The clusters do not 
need to be disjoint.) Given a factored prior, O:t-1, we 
do one step of exact Bayesian updating to compute 
the posterior, Ot. In general, Ot will not be factored 
as above, so we need to project to the space of factored 
distributions by computing the marginal on each clus-

-; 
UAI 2001 
MURPHY & WEISS 
381 
(a) 
0··-, 
. 
. 
. 
. 
: 
. 
-ToiU 
\ ·oV-<l 
.. Ŭ 
ŭ· 
' 
. 
:a: 
. 
. 
.
.
 
'-• 
Figure 3: Illustration of the clustering process. (a) This is a modified version of a CHMM with 4 chains. The big 
"mega no?es" conSain the joint distribution on the whole slice. We have omitted the observed leaves for clarity. 
LBP apphed to th1s graph is equivalent to BK. (b) This is like (a), except we have created overlapping clusters 
of size 2, for additional accuracy. 
ter. The product of these marginals then gives the ap­
proximate posterior, Ext. We can use a similar method 
for computing the backward messages in an efficient 
manner [1]. Boyen and Koller prove, roughly speak­
ing, that if the error introduced by the projection step 
isn't much greater than the error incurred by using 
an approximate prior, both errors relative to the true 
(uncomputable) distribution, then the overall error is 
bounded. 
The accuracy of the BK algorithm depends on the size 
of the clusters that we use to approximate the belief 
state. Exact inference corresponds to using a single 
cluster, containing all the hidden variables in a time­
slice. The most aggressive approximation corresponds 
to using N clusters, one per variable; we call this the 
"fully factorized" approximation. 
It is clear that the fully factorized version of BK is 
very similar to the FF algorithm, but there is one im­
portant difference: BK assumes that we update the 
factored prior exactly (using, say, junction tree) be­
fore computing the marginals, whereas FF computes 
the (approximate) marginals directly. BK is obviously 
more accurate than FF, but sometimes it cannot be 
used, because even one step of exact updating is too 
expensive. 
The cost of using BK is determined by the size of the 
maximal cliques of the moralized, triangulated ver­
sion of the two-slice DBN. (Unrolling the DBN for 
many slices induces long-distance correlations, and re­
sults in cliques that span the whole time-slice, as we 
saw above.) For the coupled HMM (CHMM) model 
in Figure 1, the cliques just correspond to the fami­
lies (nodes and their parents), so the algorithm takes 
O(T NQF+l) time, the same as FF. But for the wa­
ter model (see Figure 1), we also get extra "non-local" 
cliques due to triangulation. For more complex mod­
els, such as the 2D generalisation of a CHMM- where 
each time slice is now an N = n x n lattice, and each 
cell depends on all the nodes in its "receptive field" in 
the previous slice (but not on its neighbors within a 
slice) - the largest clique has size n, and hence the 
running time of BK is O(T NQYN), even in the fully 
factorized case. 
4 
BK and FF as special cases of loopy 
belief propagation 
Pearl's belief propagation algorithm [16] is a way of 
computing exact marginal posterior probabilities in 
graphs with no undirected cycles (loops). Essentially it 
generalises the forwards-backwards algorithm to trees. 
When applied to a graph with loops, the algorithm 
is sometimes called "loopy belief propagation" (LBP); 
in this case, the resulting "posteriors" may not be cor­
rect, and can even oscillate. Nevertheless, the out­
standing empirical success of turbo decoding, which 
has be shown to be equivalent to LBP [13], has cre­
ated great interest in the algorithm. 
LBP has been empirically shown to work well on sev­
eral kinds of Bayesian networks which are quite differ­
ent from turbo codes [15, 7]. In addition, a number of 
theoretical results have now been proved for networks 
in which all nodes are Gaussian [21], for networks in 
which there is only a single loop [20], and for general 
networks but using the max-product (Viterbi) version 
instead of the sum-product (forwards-backwards) ver­
sion of the algorithm [6]. 
The key assumption in LBP is that the messages com­
ing into a node are independent. But this is exactly the 
same assumption that we make in the FF algorithm! 
Indeed, we can show that both algorithms are equiv­
alent if we use a specific order in which to send mes­
sages. Normally we implement LBP using a decentral­
ized message passing protocol, in which, at each step, 
every node computes its own ..\ and 7!' in parallel (based 
on the incoming message at the previous step), and 
then sends out ..\ and 7l' messages to all its neighbors. 
However, we can also imagine a forwards-backwards 

382 
MURPHY & WEISS 
UAI2001 
(FB) protocol, in which each node first sends 1r (a) 
messages from left to right, and then sends >. (,B) mes­
sages from right to left. A single pass of this FB pro­
tocol is equivalent to FF.2 
The fixed points of LBP are the same, no matter what 
protocol is used. If there is not a unique fixed point, 
the algorithms may end up at different answers. They 
can also have different behavior in the short term. In 
particular, if the D BN is in fact an HMM, then a single 
FB iteration (2T N message computations) will result 
in the exact posteriors, whereas it requires T iterations 
of the decentralized protocol (each iteration comput­
ing 2T N messages in parallel) to reach the same result; 
hence the centralized algorithm is more efficient [17]. 
For loopy graphs, it is not clear which protocol is bet­
ter; it depends on whether local or global information 
is more important for computing the posteriors. In 
this paper, we use the centralized (FB) protocol. 
It is also easy to see that the fully-factorized version 
of BK is equivalent to a single FB pass of LBP applied 
to a modified DBN, as shown in Figure 3. For each 
slice, we create two "mega nodes" that contains all 
the (hidden) nodes in that slice. The messages corn­
ing into the first mega node are assumed independent; 
they are then multiplied together to form the (approx­
imate) prior3; a single message is then sent to the sec­
ond mega node, corresponding to an exact update step 
using the QN x QN transition matrix; finally, the indi­
vidual marginals are computed, and the process is re­
peated. Of course, BK does not actually construct the 
mega nodes, and does the exact update using junction 
tree, but the two algorithms are functionally equiva­
lent. To simulate BK when the clusters contain more 
than one node, we simply create new clustered nodes, 
in addition to the mega-nodes, and run LBP on the 
new graph, as illustrated in Figure 3. 
Since FF and BK are equivalent to one iteration of 
LBP, on the regular and clustered graphs respectively, 
we can improve on both of these algorithms by iter­
ating more than once. This gives the algorithm the 
opportunity to "recover" from its incorrect indepen­
dence assumptions. We will see in the Section 5 that 
even a small number of iterations can help dramati­
cally. 
2In the case of noisy-or nodes, there are efficient ways to 
compute the>. and 1r messages without having to do work 
which is exponential in the number of parents [16]. This 
reduces the overall complexity of FF from O(T NQF+l) to 
O(TNFQ). 
3For a directed graph, naive Pearl would take O(QN) 
time to compute 1r for the mega-node, but we can do this in 
O(QN) time by exploiting the fact that the CPT factorizes. 
Alternatively, we can use an undirected graph, in which 
the computation of messages always takes time linear in 
the number of neighbors. 
4.1 
A free energy for iterated BK 
The equivalence between BK and a single iteration of 
LBP on the clustered graph allows us to utilize the re­
cent result of Yedidia et al [22] to obtain a free energy 
for "iterated" BK. We define the "iterated" BK algo­
rithm as running LBP on the clustered graph using a 
FB schedule until convergence. The first iteration of 
iterated BK is equivalent to BK but in subsequent it­
erations, the a and (3 messages interact to improve the 
quality of approximation. The analysis of [22] shows 
that iterated BK can only converge to zero gradient 
points of the Bethe free energy. 
This sheds light over the relationship between iterated 
BK and the mean field (MF) approximation. The MF 
free energy is the same as the iterated BK free en­
ergy when joint distributions over pairs of nodes are 
replaced by a product of marginal beliefs over individ­
ual nodes: iterated BK captures dependencies between 
nodes in subsequent slices while MF does not. While 
this result only holds for iterated BK, ordinary BK can 
be thought of as a first approximation to iterated BK. 
5 
Experimental results 
In this section, we compare the BK algorithm with 
k iterations of LBP on the original graph, using the 
FB protocol (k = 1 iteration corresponds to FF). 
We used a CHMM model with 10 chains trained on 
some real freeway traffic data using exact EM [12]. 
N 
Q 
. 
We define the Lt error as Dot 
= Li=t Ls=l JP(X; = 
sJYt:T)- F(Xf = s!Yt:r)J, where P(·) is the exact pos­
terior and F(-) is the approximate posterior. In Fig­
ure 4, we plot this against t for 1-4 iterations of LBP. 
Clearly, the posteriors are oscillating, and this hap­
pens on many sequences with this model. We there­
fore used the damping trick described in [15]. In this 
case, each new message is defined to be a convex com­
bination of the usual expression and the old messsage, 
with weight J.L given to the old message. Hence J.L = 0 
corresponds to undamped propagation, and J.L = 1 cor­
responds to not updating the messages at all, i.e., only 
using local evidence. It is easy to show that any fixed 
points reached using this algorithm are fixed points of 
the original set of (undamped) equations. It is clear 
from Figure 5 that damping helps considerably. The 
results are summarised in Figure 6, where we see that 
after a small number of iterations, LBP with J.L = 0.1 
is doing better than BK. Other sequences give similar 
behavior. 
To check that these results are not specific to this 
model/ data set, we also compared the algorithms on 
the water DBN shown in Figure 1. We generated ob­
servation sequences of length 100 from this model us-

---i 
UAI2001 
x10-4 
6 
0 0 
6 
.I l 
Jl 
200 
400 
1 iter 
3 iter 
MURPHY & WEISS 
383 
x10 .... 
m 
6 
g4 
Q) 
:i 2 
I i 
H 
0 
Ů. 
600 
0 
200 
400 
600 
2 iter 
x10 .... 
6 
.._ 
g4 
Q) 
:i 2 
0 
600 
0 
600 
4 iter 
Figure 4: £1 error on marginal posteriors vs. timeslice after iterations 1-4 of undamped LBP applied to the 
traffic CHMM. The £1 error oscillates with a period of 2 (as seen by the similarity between the graphs for 
iterations 1/3 and 2/4); this implies that the underlying marginals are oscillating with the same period. 
6 
1 iter 
x10""" 
6 
g4 
Q) 
:i 2 
I I 
0 
d l 
0 
200 
400 
18 iter 
6 
X 1 
6 
g4 
Q) 
:i 2 
0 
600 
0 
-4 
2 iter 
200 
BK 
400 
600 
Figure 5: iterations 1, 2, and 18 of LBP with damping factor f.l = 0.1, and after using 1 iteration of BK, on the 
traffic CHMM. 

384 
MURPHY & WEISS 
UAI2001 
0.08 
0.07 
I 
, I 
- - 0.1 
-- ! 
-- . 0.6 
0.06 
0.05 
' 
ħ0.04 
::; 
0.03 
0.02 
0.01 
'·. 
00 
5 
iterations 
Figure 6: 
Results of applying LBP to the traffic 
CHMM with 10 chains. The lower solid horizontal line 
is the error incurred by BK. The oscillating line is the 
error incurred by LBP using damping factor J.L = 0; 
the lowest curve corresponds to J.L = 0.1 and the high­
est to f..L = 0.8. The upper horizontal line corresponds 
to not updating the messages at all (J.L = 1), and gives 
an indication of performance based on local evidence 
alone. 
ing random parameters and binary nodes, and then 
compared the marginal posteriors as a function of 
number of iterations and damping factor. The results 
for a typical sequence are shown in Figure 7. This time 
we see that there is no oscillation, and that as few as 
two iterations of LBP can outperform BK. 
In addition to accuracy, it is also interesting to see 
how the algorithms compare in terms of speed. 
We 
therefore generated random data from CHMMs with 
N 
= 
1, 3, . .. , 11 chains, and computed the posteri­
ors using the different methods. 
The running times 
are shown in Figure 8. It is clear that both BK and 
FF /LBP have a running time which is linear in N (for 
the CHMM model), but the constant factors of BK 
are much higher, due to the complexity of the algo­
rithm, and in particular, the need to perform repeated 
marginalisations. This is also why BK is slower than 
exact inference for N < 11, even though it is asymp­
totically more efficient.4 
4 All algorithms were implemented in Matlab and are in­
cluded in the Bayes Net Toolbox, which can be downloaded 
from YY'Il. cs. berkeley. edu/ ""murphyk/Bayes/bnt. html. 
12x10 
-3 
11 
10 
9 
... 
e 
Q; 8 
:::i 
7 
6 
5 
4 
1 
·-._\ 
1.5 
2 
2.5 
3 
3.5 
iterations 
4 
4.5 
5 
Figure 7: Same as Figure 6, but for the water network. 
The dotted lines, from top to bottom, represent f..l = 0, 
f..L = 0.1 and f..L = 0.2. The solid line represents BK. 
0.5 ,.----, 
o · jtree 
0.45 
R 0.4 
!: 
0 Ĩ0.35 
!!. 
-Ħ 0.3 
Cij 
a; 0.25 
0. <I) Q 0.2 
!0.15 
0. P 0.1 
0.05 
...,._ bk 
· +· loopy 1 
-+ · loopy 2 
-+- loopy 3 
+ loopy4 
/ ,· 
,· 
.. 
0 
: .. 
-
-
. 
.ū· . . .. 
. ' 
. · 
_.+ 
--+ 
+ 
11 
Figure 8: Running time on CHMMs as a function of 
the number of chains. The vertical axis is the total 
running time divided by the length of the sequence. 
The horizontal axis is the number of chains. The dot­
ted curve is junction tree, the steep straight line is 
BK, and the shallow straight lines are LBP; "loopy k" 
means k iterations of LBP. 

UAI 2001 
MURPHY & WEISS 
385 
6 
Related work 
We have already discussed in detail the connections 
between LBP, BK and FF. However, there are several 
other approximate inference algorithms with a very 
similar "flavor". Perhaps the closest is the expecta­
tion propagation algorithm [14]. This is also an itera­
tive message passing algorithm, but now the messages 
encode moments of the variables computed with re­
spect to some approximating distribution. The mini­
bucket algorithm [4] also approximates joint distribu­
tions over collections of nodes as a product of smaller 
terms; however, this is not an iterative algorithm, and 
hence cannot correct for erroneous independence as­
sumptions made in the first pass. 
7 
Conclusions 
We have described a very simple approximate inference 
algorithm for DBNs, and shown that it is equivalent 
to a single iteration of loopy belief propagation (LBP). 
We have also elucidated the connection between the 
BK algorithm and LBP, and we used the free energy 
of LBP to compare BK and the mean field approxima­
tions. 
Finally, we showed empirically that LBP can 
improve the accuracy of both FF and BK.
