ONLINE FAKE REVIEW DETECTION USING 
SUPERVISED MACHINE LEARNING AND BERT MODEL 
1Abrar Qadir Mir, 2Furqan Yaqub Khan, Mohammad Ahsan Chishti 
1,3Dept. of IT, CU Kashmir, 
J&K, India, 191131 
2Dept. of CSE, IIT Patna, Bihar, India 801106 

 
Abstract 
Online shopping stores have grown steadily over the past few years. Due to the massive growth 
of these businesses, the detection of fake reviews has attracted attention. Fake reviews are 
seriously trying to mislead customers and thereby undermine the honesty and authenticity of 
online shopping environments. So far, various of fake review classifiers have been proposed 
that take into account the actual content of the review. To improve the accuracies of existing 
fake review classification or detection approaches, we propose to use BERT (Bidirectional 
Encoder Representation from Transformers) model to extract word embeddings from texts (i.e. 
reviews). Word embeddings are obtained in various basic methods such as SVM (Support 
vector machine), Random Forests, Naive Bayes and others. The confusion matrix method was 
also taken into account to evaluate and graphically represent the results. The results indicate 
that the SVM classifiers outperforms the others in terms of accuracy and f1-score with an 
accuracy of 87.81%, which is 7.6% higher than the classifier used in the previous study [5]. 
Keywords: BERT Model ; Machine Learning; Fake reviews; inserting words; Control detection 
1. Introduction 
Online reviewing play vital role in various online shopping environments such as online hotel 
reservations, restaurant reservations and more importantly in the case of e-commerce sites as 
they make it possible for customers to judge the quality/price of different products in order. 
evaluate the seller's services and also make purchasing decisions. The users using online 
shopping platforms has been increasing significantly for quite some time now. Let’s take an 
example of TripAdvisor, globally the most popular travel website, has approximately 455.5 
million users and more than 600 million user reviews covering more than 7.5 million hotel, 
restaurant, and airline reservations [1]. However, some unscrupulous businesses, motivated by 
self-interest,  mislead some less cautions customers by writing fake reviews. In order to over 
promote products of their choice while disparaging their alternate choices. Fake reviewing 
drastically affect and threaten the authenticity of online shopping environments. Therefore, 
detecting and removing such fake reviews has become vital and unconditionally important area 
of research for the present and if not dealt properly possibly for future as well. The Fake review 
detection can be manual or automatic but manual execution of the process is considered 
expensive, time-consuming and incorrect compared to automated detection methods [2]. Over 

the past decade, many significant advances have been made in the automatic identification of 
fake reviews. Many ML based tools and techniques have been effectively detecting fake 
reviews, some of the tools and techniques are SVM and Naïve Bayes[3]. This study mainly 
focuses on review content to detect fake reviews. NLP is used to create some review features 
which are not directly related to data or text provided. We used BERT (Bidirectional Encoder 
Representation from Transformers) to perform NLP tasks and other text processing such as 
feature selection. 
2. Related work 
The online shopping environment has started to gain massive interest in recent past and plays 
a important role in people's lives, saving time or saving money. People seem to rely quite 
heavily on such online shopping. From this point of view, finding out online reviews is equally 
important and is one of the hot research topics today. The problem of detecting fake reviewing 
had been addressed since 2007 [4]. The basic categories for fake review detection research are 
categorized as; textual and behavioural features. Text characters means characterization of text 
of reviews or to analyse and characterise the content of review text. Behavioural traits 
characterise the non-verbal characteristics of review data corpus. It mainly depends on the 
behaviour of reviewers, like style of writing, expressions which express emotions, and 
frequency of reviewing. Liu [6] proposed the first review detection model using review 
similarity and products features as criteria. The quality of fake reviews, also called "spammers", 
to post fake reviews of their products has been exploited. Ott [7] proposed a classification 
model based on text polarity of review data corpus; created a dataset that contained four-
hundred reviews divided into 2 groups real and fake or artificial and calculated the 
effectiveness of his model using different classifiers and on different system configurations. 
Savage [8] improved the efficiency of Ott’s model by updating it with some new syntactic 
features. Farris [9] proposed another model for classification of fake reviews using Genetic 
Algorithm with Random Weight Network. This model specifically addressed spam detection. 
This model generated excellent results and it was concluded with this model that spam reviews 
can be classified with good precision, recall and accuracy using automated classifiers. Fake 
reviewer identification: [10] Although the above methods worked well in detecting fake 
comments and reviews, it was recognized that fake reviewer detection is an additional part and 
needs to be invented. Huang [11] came up with another theory that inauthentic reviewers 
usually write comments frequently in particular time periods, so he defined time frame for 
comment upload time and estimated upload frequencies of fake comments which where 
unusually different from real reviews, 
i.e.; If, uploads > threshold; The reviewer is said to be fake. 
Lim [12] examined a large number of reviewers and similar data and pointed out two features 
of fake reviewers: 1) fake reviewers target review a “particular” product or a specific online 
purchase. 2) The pattern and style of writing and the frequency of posting reviews is generally 
different for a real and a fake reviewer. Based on these two complimentary traits of reviewing, 
it modelled the reviewer's behaviour and calculated the reviewer's score using another 
algorithm. In [13], Supervised ML were used to classify reveiws. The supervised classification 

techniques used are Naïve-Bayes, SVM, K-Star, KNN, and Decision trees. The 
experimentation was performed on three different movie review labelled datasets.[14] having 
1400, 2000,  10662 reviews per dataset. In [15], the Naïve-Bayes, SVM, Decision Tree 
techniques were used along with classifiers like Random Forest and Maximum Entropy 
Classifier. The dataset  forming of Samsung products and services reviews with 10000 fake 
reviews. In [16], Chicago hotel review dataset of 1600 reviews was used. In [17], The RNN, 
Average GRNN, GRNN, CNN,  and Bi-directional Average GRNN’s were used to classify 
data corpuse. The dataset used was from [18] having both fake and real reviews based on  
hotels, restaurants and doctors. Only textual features were taken into consideration discarding 
behavioural features. 
 
3. Background 
To parse the high volume data with velocity which can’t be dealt through routine algorithms 
for time critical tasks with accuracy machine learning is tool of choice. Machine Learning has 
an advantage of learning and developing algorithms on its own based on data patterns and 
improvise them while in use with further data[19]. The classification of machine learning 
algorithms is based on labels and action-reward theory[20]; Based on Labels the classes are 
supervised, semi-supervised and unsupervised ML techniques while based on action-reward 
theory reinforced machine learning techniques are there. Labels and data are both needed in 
supervised machine learning techniques[21] while in  unsupervised ML only data is provided 
and relation is found between different data points based on desired attributes or functions. The 
semi-supervised techniques are hybrid of supervised and unsupervised ML techniques. Finally, 
Reinforced learning deals with reacting to particular scenario or action if the reaction is in the 
right direction the priority is added to step taken that is the step is rewarded if not the priority 
is decreased for that particular step that means the step is punished. Mainly Supervised ML 
classifiers are used in this article. Few prominent supervised classifiers used are SVM which 
separates the two needed classes via a hyperplane[22] Another one is naïve bayes classifier 
which uses bayes theorm to get the probability of particular review to be of one of the given 
classes. The equation for bayes theorm is P(A—B) = P(B—A)*P(A) P(B) [23].  
The K-Nearest Neighbour’s (KNN) algorithm [24] mostly used in statistical estimations and 
as well in pattern recognitions. The distance function is used to classify the least distant 
attributes into one cluster thus trying to minimize the intra-cluster distance and maximise the 
inter-cluster distances in order to classify more accurately[25] Decision Tree [26] classifies 
data based values of gini-ratio, entropy, information gain etc. Thus each decision point is 
represented as an internal node of tree while each class is represented by leaf node of tree giving 
the algorithm’s representation a tree like shape hence called decision tree. Random Forest [27] 
is an ensemble of more than one decision trees usually all unique thus eliminating the  problem 
of overfitting which usually occurs in decision tree algorithm. Logistic regression [28] also 
develops a hyperplane between two different datatypes based on logistic function or log 
function. 
 

4. Data files 
Primarily four datasets viz hotel, doctor, restaurant and amazon datasets are used in this article 
for experimentation(Table 1). Cornell Universities Positive review[29] and negative 
review[30] datasets are merged to form hotel dataset as described in[29-30].These datasets are 
considered the gold standard mock review data corpuses[30]. Turks or assigned Fake reviewers 
were the ones responsible for creating fake reviews, one review per Turk. The reviews were 
filtered as short and plagiarized review were removed. Turkers were instructed to write a 
review which seems realistic in nature. Correspondingly geniune reviews were taken from 
various online reviewing sites like Expedia, TripAdvisor and Hotels.com. The dataset contains 
reviews of 20 hotels with 80 reviews of each one divided equally into 2 classes thus forming 
1600 reviews half of class true reviews and half of class false reviews. Corresponding actual 
true and false labels were also included for each review. Thus each review in the dataset has a 
true/false label, hotel information, travel agency name, polarity (positive/negative), and review 
content with average word count of 152 per review. Similarly two more datasets were created 
[31] namely restaurant review dataset and doctor review dataset. Twenty fake reviews were 
created for 10 most famous restaurants in Chicago and 356 positive fake reviews for doctor 
review dataset were created by well rated American Turkers and true reviews of same number 
were taken from customer reviews of those hotels and doctors. Amazon's dataset consists of 
21,000 reviews, of which 10,500 were identified as fake by Amazon. Some additional 
information was also provided about the reviews like class label, ratings, verified purchase (yes 
or no), product category, and product ID. With average review rating as 4.13/5 as well with 
55.7% of the data from verified purchases. The reviews were form 30 product categories 700 
reviews per category. These categories are identified as non-compliant with Amazon's policies. 
 
 
Table 1 Fake review datasets used in this study 
 
5. The proposed system 
The proposed approach shown in Figure 1. The approach is divided into 3 stages and provides 
us with the best model for fake review classification given as follows: 
Dataset 
Fake/truthful reviews 
Polarity 
Aver. review length (words) 
Hotel [29, 30] 
400/400 
Positive and negative 
151.9 
Restaurant [31] 
200/200 
Positive 
137.1 
Doctor[32] 
356/200 
Positive 
102.4 

   
                           
     
     
 
 
 
               
 
       
                  
                   
 
  
                                           
      
 
         Fig 1: Working of the proposed model 
1) The dataset is loaded into a BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representation from 
Transformers) to generate word embeddings, which are large vector representations of the text 
words in the dataset. 2) The input is then loaded into the classification models for their training. 
Training and testing data are divided in the ratio: 80:20, i.e.: 80% for training and the rest for 
testing the model. 3) Results are evaluated using a confusion matrix representation for 
Precision, Recall, F1score and Accuracy. 4) The best performing classifier is then saved and 
later used to detect user reviews as fake or real. 
 
 
6. Operation of the BERT model 
BERT (Bidirectional Representations from Transformers) based on transformer – an attention 
mechanism that learns contextual connections in text between words. A simple transformation 
has an encoder to read the text input and a decoder to generate the task prediction. Since the 
goal of BERT is to create a model of the language representation, it only requires part of the 
coder. The input to BERT encoder is a set of tokens that are first transformed into vectors and 
then processed in a neural network. However, BERT requires the input to be decorated with 
some additional metadata before processing can begin. Transformer essentially composes a 
layer that maps onto sequences of sequences, so the output is also a vector sequence. 
6.1 Generating BERT Embedding 
Generating a large sentence embedding is created using BERT. BERT is a pre-trained model. 
Let the sentence Si be tokenized into words W = {w1, w2, w3,..,wn}. Each w∈ W is fed to 
Dataset 
Semantic 
Vector
Training 
Classifier over 
word embeddings 
User 
Reviews 
Saving best 
performing 
Model 
Evaluation of 
Results 
Real 
Fake 

BERT to obtain the word embeddings for ws ∈W. Let the loaded embedding for w1 be E1. 
Similarly, we obtain embeddings for all wn words of Si, and so we have Vn embeddings for n 
words of sentence Si. Then all embeddings of the Si theorem are combined to form the large 
embeddings (BV) of the Si theorem. So BE = {E1 ∪ E1 ∪ E1 ∪ ... ∪ En }. Inserts are generated 
for the hotel dataset. Once we have all large embeddings of all reviews and their corresponding 
labels, we load these embeddings into the classification models for training and testing, in ratio 
of 80:20 training/testing data. 
7. Experimental evaluation:  
In this section, we present the results of six experiments and their evaluation using six different 
machine learning classifiers, namely: SVM, Random Forest, Bagging classifier, AdaBoost 
classifier, Naïve Bayes and K-NN classifier. We experimented with our classification model 
on the Hotel, Restaurant and Doctor datasets. However, due to space constraints, we only show 
the experimental results performed on the hotel dataset. The confusion matrices for all 
implemented classifiers are given below: 
      
 
 
 
            
Figure 2: Confusion matrix for SVM  
 
               Figure 3: Confusion matrix for Random Forest
 
 
      
                        
 
Figure 4: Confusion matrix for Bagging classifier 
          Figure 5: Confusion matrix for Adaptive Boost                                      

 
                  
 
Figure 6: Confusion matrix for Naïve Bayes  
Figure 7: Confusion matrix for K-NN classifier 
 
 
 
                                             Table 2: Comparative performance analysis of proposed model  
 
 
7. Conclusion and future work 
In this article, we've shown the importance of reviews and how they affect almost everything 
related to web data. It's clear that reviews play a vital role in people's decision-making. Thus, 
detecting fake reviews is a lively and ongoing area of research. A machine learning approach 
to detect fake reviews is presented, and review properties are considered in the proposed 
approach. The Hotels dataset is used to present an experimental evaluation of the proposed 
approach. Different classifiers were used on this dataset. The results reveal that the SVM 
classifier outperforms other classifiers (with 87.81% accuracy) in the process of detecting fake 
reviews and therefore can be used to effectively classify reviews as real or fake by considering 
only the text content of the reviews and not necessarily the sentiment traits. However, future 
work may consider including behavioural features of reviewers, such as features that depend 
on the number of times reviewers perform reviews, the time it takes reviewers to complete 
            
              Classifier 
                 Accuracy (%) 
                   F-Score 
Previous 
work[18] 
This Study 
Previous 
work[18] 
This Study 
SVM 
80.75 
87.81 
0.80 
0.88 
Random Forest 
79.31 
83.43 
0.79 
0.83 
Bagging  
78.19 
79.06 
0.78 
0.79 
K-NN 
71.38 
77.18 
0.68 
0.78 
AdaBoost 
77.06 
78.43 
0.77 
0.78 
Gaussian Naïve Bayes  
 81.25 
 78.43 
0.81 
0.78 

reviews, and how often they submit positive or negative reviews. Considering behavioural 
features is highly expected to enhance the performance of the presented fake review detection 
approach. Also, using neural network models to perform this task would be equally beneficial 
for detecting fake reviews from large datasets.
