arXiv:1003.4099v1  [cond-mat.stat-mech]  22 Mar 2010
Enhancement of the longitudinal transport by a weakly
transversal drive
Ya-feng He1,2∗and Bao-quan Ai1
1Laboratory of Quantum Information Technology, ICMP and SPTE,
South China Normal University, 510006 Guangzhou, China.
2College of Physics Science and Technology,
Hebei University, 071002 Baoding, China
(Dated: November 19, 2018)
Abstract
Transport of Brownian particles in a two-dimensional asymmetric tube is investigated by ap-
plying a polarized ﬁeld. From the Brownian dynamics simulations we ﬁnd that the longitudinal
current can be enhanced remarkably by applying a weakly transversal drive.
Multiple current
reversals can be realized by altering the driving frequency of the polarized ﬁeld. By coupling the
longitudinal and transversal forces together, one can control the particle transport ﬂexibly.
PACS numbers:
05. 40. -a, 05. 60. -k, 07. 20. Pe

1

I.
INTRODUCTION
The problem of non-equilibrium-induced transport processes has attracted much inter-
est in theoretical as well as experimental physics [1–4].
This subject was motivated by
the challenge to explain unidirectional transport in biological systems [1], as well as their
potential technological applications ranging from classical non-equilibrium models [4, 5] to
quantum systems [6, 7]. In these systems directed-Brownian-motion of particles is gener-
ated by non-equilibrium noise in the absence of any net macroscopic forces and potential
gradients. Ratchets [8–11] have been proposed to model the unidirectional motion due to
the zero-mean non-equilibrium ﬂuctuation.
Recently, ratchet eﬀects were realized in many experimental works [12–15, 17, 18].
Savel’ev and Nori [12] proposed devices for controlling the motion of ﬂux quanta in su-
perconductors and could address a central problem in many superconducting devices. They
also demonstrated experimentally how to guide ﬂux quanta in layered superconductors by
using a drive that is asymmetric in time instead of being asymmetric in space [13]. Once
or multiple reversal in the direction of the vortex ﬂow has been observed [14, 15]. Moti-
vated by the theoretical study in Ref. [16], Kalman and co-workers [17] studied ion current
rectiﬁcation in single conical nanopores in polymer ﬁlms in the presence of two rectangular
voltage signals. In addition, the ratchet eﬀects were also realized in cold atoms. Renzoni and
co-workers [18] demonstrate experimentally a gating ratchet with cold rubidium atoms in a
driven near-resonant optical lattice. A single harmonic periodic modulation of the potential
depth is applied, together with a single-harmonic rocking force. Directed motion is observed
as a result of the breaking of the symmetries of the system.
Most studies have revolved around the energy barriers [19, 20]. However, in many trans-
port phenomena [21], such as those taking place in micro- and nano-pores, zeolites, biological
cells, ion channels, nanoporous materials and microfuidic devices etched with grooves and
chambers, Brownian particles, instead of diﬀusing freely in the host liquid phase, undergo
a constrained motion. Recently, Reguera and coworkers [22] used the mesoscopic nonequi-
librium thermodynamics theory to derive the general kinetic equation of the system and
studied the current and the diﬀusion of Brownian particles moving in a symmetric channel
with a biased external force. Ai and co-workers [23] studied the transport driven by the
longitudinal ac forces and found that the motion of particles can indeed be rectiﬁed, with a
2

sign that depends on the details of the wall proﬁle. Interestingly, the net current can even
be obtained by applying a transverse ac drive, like a transverse ac force or transverse wall
vibration [24, 25].
However, if a polarized ﬁeld coupled by longitudinal force and transversal force is ap-
plied on Brownian particles, how about the competition and cooperation between them in
the transport? In the present work, we study the particle transport in an asymmetrically
periodic tube driven by thermal noise and polarized ﬁeld by using Brownian dynamics sim-
ulation method. We emphasize on the enhancement and secondary reversal of the current
by coupling the longitudinal and transverse forces together.
II.
MODEL AND METHODS
Because most of the molecular transport occurs in the overdamped regime, the inertial
eﬀects can be neglected in the study. So the overdamped dynamics can be described by the
following Langevin equations in the dimensionless form,
dx
dt = fx(t) +
√
Dξx(t),
(1)
dy
dt = fy(t) +
√
Dξy(t),
(2)
where, x, y are the two-dimensional coordinates, D is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient, and ξx,y(t)
presents the Gaussian white noise with zero mean and correlation function: < ξi(t)ξj(t
′) >=
2δi,jδ(t −t
′) for i, j = x, y. < ... > denotes an ensemble average over the distribution of
noise. δ is the Dirac delta function. Two periodic forces are applied on the particles in the
longitudinal and transversal directions, respectively with the forms:
fx(t) = Ax cos(ωt + φ1),
(3)
fy(t) = Ay cos(ωt + φ2),
(4)
where, Ax, Ay are the amplitudes of the forces in the longitudinal and transversal directions,
respectively. φ1 and φ2 are the phase of the sinusoidal forces. Here, we only consider the
case that the forces in the two directions have identical frequency ω. The superposition of
fx(t) and fy(t) gives rise to a polarized ﬁeld rotating in two dimensions as shown in ﬁgure
3

1. The mode of the polarized ﬁeld is characterized by the phase diﬀerence ∆φ = φ2 −φ1.
Driven by the polarized ﬁeld, the particles collide with the asymmetric tube with diﬀerent
forms.
FIG. 1: Polarized ﬁeld by superposition of the longitudinal and transversal forces with diﬀerent
modes.
In this study we consider the case that the particles are conﬁned in a tube. The asym-
metric tube is sketched in Fig. 2(a) with the shape described by its half width:
y(x) = a[sin(2πx
L ) + ∆
4 sin(4πx
L )] + b,
(5)
here, a is the parameter that controls the slope of the tube and ∆is the asymmetric parame-
ter of the tube shape. The parameter b determines the half width at the bottleneck. L is the
period of the tube. The Langevin equation describing the overdamped Brownian particle
can be reduced to an eﬀective 1D Fokker-Planck equation in the absence of the longitudinal
force fx [22]:
∂
∂tP(x, t) = ∂
∂x[D ∂
∂x + V
′(x, t)]P(x, t),
(6)
where, the eﬀective potential
V (x, t) = −D ln[ 2D
fy(t) sinh(fy(t)y(x)
D
)].
(7)
The transient proﬁle of the eﬀective potential is shown in Fig. 2 (b). The potential
barriers are skewed to the right with ratchet length L+ > L−. Under appropriate parameters,
the maximum of the potential keeps constant, while the minimum vibrates periodically with
frequency of twice of the driving frequency. This leads to periodic change on the potential
4

 
f
y
(t)
f
x
(t)
(a)
y(x)
(b)
V(x)
L
L
+
L
-
 
x
FIG. 2: Schematic of the two-dimensional tube (a) and the corresponding eﬀective potential (b).
L = L++L−is the period of the tube, L+ and L−indicate the asymmetry of the eﬀective potential.
The dash line and the solid line in (b) present the vibration range of the potential well.
barrier. Together with the longitudinal force, it gives rise to complex dynamics of the particle
transport.
We carry out the Brownian dynamic simulations performed by integration of the over-
damped Langevin equation using the standard stochastic Euler algorithm. Reﬂecting and
periodic boundary conditions are applied in the transversal and longitudinal direction [25],
respectively. The average particle velocity derived from an ensemble average of more than
104 along the x-direction reads:
v = ⟨˙x⟩= lim
t→∞
⟨x(t)⟩
t
.
(8)
Unless otherwise noted, our simulations are under the parameters sets: a = 1/2π, b =
1.2/2π, ∆= 1.0, D = 0.1, ∆φ = 0.0, and L = 1.0 throughout this work.
III.
NUMERICAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
We ﬁrstly study the determination of the frequency of the polarized ﬁeld on the particle
transport. Figure 3 presents the dependence of the mean velocity on the driving frequency for
the case that longitudinal force, transversal force, and linearly polarized ﬁeld are applied,
5

respectively. It exhibits interesting phenomena of enlargement and secondary reversal of
current originated from the polarized ﬁeld as increasing the driving frequency.
We ﬁnd
that it actually demonstrates the cooperative relationship between the longitudinal and
transversal forces. In order to illustrate this, it is necessary to discuss the cases that the
longitudinal and transversal forces are applied individually.
0.01
1
100
0.00
0.08
0.16
0.24
-0.0004
0.0000
0.0004
 
 
v
 A
x
=0, A
y
=3
 A
x
=3, A
y
=0
 A
x
=3, A
y
=3
 
 
FIG. 3: (Color online) Dependence of the mean velocity on the driving frequency. The square,
circle, and angle lines present the applications of transversal force, longitudinal force, and polarized
ﬁeld. The inset shows the mean velocity at high frequency.
In ﬁgure 3 the circle line presents the mean velocity induced only by the longitudinal force,
Ax ̸= 0, Ay = 0. It can be seen that the current changes direction once as increasing the
frequency. In the adiabatic limit ω →0, the driven source can be divided into two opposite
static forces Ax and −Ax. The mean velocity can be expressed as v = 1
2[v(−Ax)+v(Ax)]. In
this case the particles get enough time to cross the both sides and it is easier for a particle to
climb the potential well to the right than to the left, which gives rise to a positive current.
As increasing the frequency, the duration which the force acts on the particles decreases in
every period. The diﬀusion of the Brownian particles to the left bottleneck depresses the
particles to climb to the right wall, which leading to a negative net current. For the extreme
case ω →∞, the particles cannot respond the applied force, which makes the current tend
to be zero. So, the current changes direction from positive to negative in the absence of the
transversal force.
When the Brownian particles are driven periodically only in transversal direction, Ax = 0,
Ay ̸= 0, the behaviors of the current change dramatically as shown by the square line in
6

Fig. 3. In the adiabatic limit ω →0, the mean velocity also is v = 1
2[v(−Ay) + v(Ay)]. It
is obvious that no net current occurs when a transversal constant force is applied, namely,
v(−Ay) = v(Ay) = 0.
Therefore, the current tends to zero in the adiabatic limit.
On
increasing the frequency, the Brownian particles have enough time to diﬀuse in the whole
area. It has higher probability to collide with the right wall because the area of the right
wall is larger than that of the left wall, which gives rise to a negative current. When the
frequency is higher, the particles have no enough time to reach the whole area of the right
wall. The probability of the particles colliding with the right wall is smaller than that with
the left wall, leading to a positive current. For the extreme case ω →∞, the Brownian
particles cannot respond the driven force, which results in a zero current. So, the current
changes direction once from negative to positive in the absence of the longitudinal force.
However, if a polarized ﬁeld is applied, novel phenomena appear as indicated by the angle
line in Fig. 3. One of the important results is that the current is enlarged remarkably when
the driving frequency is not too high. For the positive current, the magniﬁed eﬀect becomes
more evident. The current induced by a polarized ﬁeld is not a simple algebraic sum of
those from longitudinal and transversal forces. The ampliﬁcation factor can be control by
adjusting parameters such as the driving amplitude, their ratio Ax/Ay, the period of the
tube and so on. It shows that the coupling between the longitudinal and transversal forces
can improve the rectiﬁcation eﬀect of ratchets. This is very signiﬁcant in applications such as
particle separation. The other important result is the appearance of the secondary reversal
of the current as increasing the driving frequency. As stated above, the current induced
individually by longitudinal or transversal force varies direction only once upon increasing
the frequency. However, by coupling the longitudinal and transversal forces together, the
current can undergo reversal twice. Although the magnitude of the current in Fig. 3 is small
at high frequencies (it is still within the numerical accuracy of the simulations, see Ref.[25]),
as will be shown later, one can improve the current by adjusting the control parameters.
So, a polarized ﬁeld coupled by longitudinal and transversal forces provides a more eﬃcient
way to control the particle transport, especially to realize the enlargement of the current.
As a characteristic parameter of a polarized ﬁeld, the phase diﬀerence ∆φ aﬀects the
particle transport as well. We ﬁnd that the current varies sinusoidally with a period of π
instead of 2π as changing the phase diﬀerence (not shown). This is because that the tube
owns mirror symmetry along the longitudinal axis. So, it is identical for the levorotatory
7

and dextrorotatory polarized ﬁelds when acting on the particles.
When ∆φ = 0, π, i.e.
the longitudinal and transversal forces act on the particles with the maximum amplitude
synchronously, the current reaches maximum.
However, if the longitudinal force is out
of phase with the transversal force the current will decrease.
For the cases of circular
polarizations, ∆φ = π
2, 3π
2 , the current is minimum.
0
2
4
6
0.000
0.005
0.010
 
=6
 
=1
 
 
v
L
FIG. 4: (Color online) Dependence of the mean velocity on the period of the tube at frequencies
ω = 1 and ω = 6. The width of the tube keeps constant. The amplitudes are Ax = Ay = 0.5.
There exists competitive and cooperative relationships between the longitudinal and
transversal forces on controlling the particle transport. Figure 4 presents the dependence
of the mean velocity on the period of the tube. When the period of the tube is very small
compared with the width of the tube, the aspect ratio of the tube max[y(x)]/L is large. The
particle has no enough time to collide with the wall before it climbs the entropic barrier from
the right wall. In this case the longitudinal force predominates in controlling the Brownian
particle, which leading to a positive current. On the contrary, if the period becomes large,
the aspect ratio is small. The particle will collide well with the right wall before it climbs
the entropic barrier from this side, which gives rise to a negative current. Under appropriate
value of period (the cross points on the longitudinal axis), the actions of the longitudinal and
transversal forces reach balance, and the particle couldn’t escape from the well leading the
net current to be zero. For the two extreme cases, L →0, ∞, the tube tends to be straight
and loses the symmetry-breaking. So, the current disappears. This gives us an insight that
by adjusting the period of the system, for example stretching or compressing the tube, one
can control the direction of the current.
8

0
5
10
15
20
-0.005
0.000
0.005
0.010
0
2
4
6
0.00
0.04
0.08
0.12
 A
x
=0.5, 
=1
 
 
v
A
y
 A
x
=0.5, 
=6
 A
y
=0.5, 
=1
 
 
v
A
x
 A
y
=0.5, 
=6
FIG. 5: (Color online) Dependence of the mean velocity on the ratio of driving amplitudes at
frequencies ω = 1 and ω = 6. (a) [(b)] presents the variation of the mean velocity as increasing the
transversal (longitudinal) force with ﬁxed longitudinal (transversal) force Ax = 0.5 (Ay = 0.5).
Figure 5 shows the dependence of the mean velocity on the amplitude of Ay and Ax, re-
spectively. In Fig. 5 (a) [(b)], the longitudinal (transversal) force is kept constant amplitude
Ax = 0.5 (Ay = 0.5) while increasing the amplitude of the transversal (longitudinal) force.
At the origin of the longitudinal axis in Fig. 5, the current doesn’t equal to zero, which is
induced by the longitudinal and transversal forces applied individually. From ﬁgure 5 we
can ﬁnd that, on one hand, all the curves cross the longitudinal axis once, which indicates
the competition between the longitudinal and transversal forces. The points of intersection
present the balance between the longitudinal and transversal actions leading to zero current.
So, by applying an addition transversal driving force, one can further control the current
direction beside its enhancement function.
On the other hand, there exist optimization
values of the amplitude at where the current reaches absolute maxima. This illustrates the
cooperative relationship between the longitudinal and transversal forces. In Fig. 5 (b), there
should be a maximum if the longitudinal amplitude is strong enough.
9

IV.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
In conclusion, we have studied the transport of overdamped Brownian particles conﬁned in
an asymmetrically periodic tube applying a polarized ﬁeld. By coupling the longitudinal and
transversal forces together, the current exhibits two types of novel phenomena: enhancement
and secondary reversal. The enhanced eﬃciency and the current reversal can be controlled
ﬂexibly by adjusting the system parameters such as the driving amplitudes, their ratio
Ax/Ay, the phase diﬀerent, and the period of the tube.
The results we have presented
may have a potential application in many processes, such as particle separation, diﬀusion in
biological membrane, transport in zeolites, controlled drug releases, and diﬀusion in man-
made materials.
Clearly, the model is too simple to provide a realistic description of real systems. However,
the results we have presented have wide applications in may processes, such as the vortex
ratchet in superconductor [12–15, 17], gating ratchet with cold atoms in optical lattice [18],
diﬀusion of ions and macromolecular solutes through the channels in biological membranes
[26], transport in zeolites [27], and diﬀusion in man-made periodic porous materials [21].
V.
