Iterative Hierarchical Optimization for Misspeciﬁed
Problems (IHOMP)
Daniel J. Mankowitz
Electrical Engineering Department,
The Technion - Israel Institute of Technology,
Haifa 32000, Israel

Timothy A. Mann
Google Deepmind
London, UK

Shie Mannor
Electrical Engineering Department,
The Technion - Israel Institute of Technology,
Haifa 32000, Israel

Abstract
For complex, high-dimensional Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), it may be
necessary to represent the policy with function approximation. A problem is mis-
speciﬁed whenever, the representation cannot express any policy with acceptable
performance. We introduce IHOMP : an approach for solving misspeciﬁed prob-
lems. IHOMP iteratively learns a set of context specialized options and combines
these options to solve an otherwise misspeciﬁed problem. Our main contribution is
proving that IHOMP enjoys theoretical convergence guarantees. In addition, we
extend IHOMP to exploit Option Interruption (OI) enabling it to decide where the
learned options can be reused. Our experiments demonstrate that IHOMP can ﬁnd
near-optimal solutions to otherwise misspeciﬁed problems and that OI can further
improve the solutions.
1
Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms can learn near-optimal solutions to well-deﬁned problems.
However, real-world problems rarely come in the form of a concrete problem description. A human
has to translate the poorly deﬁned target problem into a concrete problem description. A Misspeciﬁed
Problem (MP) occurs when an optimal solution to the problem description is inadequate in the target
problem. Unfortunately, creating a well-deﬁned problem description is a challenging art. Furthermore,
MPs can have serious consequences in many domains ranging from smart-grids [Abiri-Jahromi et al.,
2013, Wu et al., 2010] and robotics [Smart and Kaelbling, 2002] to inventory management systems
[Mann and Mannor, 2014]. In this paper, we introduce a hierarchical approach that mitigates the
consequences of problem misspeciﬁcation.
RL problems are often described as Markov Decision Processes [Sutton and Barto, 1998, MDPs].
A solution to a MDP is a function that generates an action when presented with the current state,
called a policy. The solution to a MDP is any policy that maximizes the long term sum of rewards.
For problems with continuous, high dimensional state-spaces, explicitly representing the policy is
infeasible, thus for the remainder of this paper we restrict our discussion to linearly parametrized
policy representations [Sutton, 1996, Roy and How, 2013].1
1Our results are generalizable and complementary to non-linear parametric policy representations.
arXiv:1602.03348v2  [cs.LG]  7 Jun 2016

Why are problems misspeciﬁed? While a problem description can be misspeciﬁed for many reasons,
one important case is due to the state representation. It is well established in the machine learning
[Levi and Weiss, 2004, Zhou et al., 2009] and RL [Konidaris et al., 2011] literature that “good”
features can have a dramatic impact on performance. Finding “good” features to represent the
state is a challenging domain speciﬁc problem that is generally considered outside of the scope of
RL. Unfortunately, domain experts may not supply useful features either because they do not fully
understand the target problem or the technicalities of reinforcement learning.
In addition, we may prefer a MP with a limited state representation for several reasons: (1) Regular-
ization: We wish to have a limited feature representation to improve the generalization and avoid
overﬁtting [Singh et al., 1995, Geramifard et al., 2012]. (2) Memory and System constraints: Only
a ﬁnite number of the features can be used due to computational constraints [Roy and How, 2013,
Singh et al., 1995]. In real-time systems, querying a feature may take too long. In physical systems,
the sensor required to measure a desired feature may be prohibitively expensive. (3) Learning on
Large Data: After learning on large amounts of data, augmenting a feature set with new features to
get improved performance is non-trivial and often inefﬁcient [Geramifard et al., 2012].
How can we mitigate misspeciﬁcation? Learning a hierarchical policy can mitigate the problems
associated with a MP and contrast this against a ﬂat policy approach where a single, parameterized
policy is used to solve the entire MDP.
To illustrate how learning a hierarchical policy can repair MPs, consider the S-shaped domain shown
in Figure 1a. To solve the task the agent must move from the bottom left corner to the goal region
denoted by the letter ‘G’ in the top right. The state representation only permits policies that move
in a straight line. So the problem is misspeciﬁed, and it is not solvable with a ﬂat policy approach
(Figure 1a.i). However, if we break up the state-space, as shown in Figure 1a.ii, and learn one policy
for each cell, the problem is solvable.
The partial policies shown in Figure 1a.ii are an example of abstract actions, called options [Sutton
et al., 1999], macro-actions [Hauskrecht et al., 1998, He et al., 2011], or skills [Konidaris and
Barto, 2009]. Learning useful options has been a topic of intense research [McGovern and Barto,
2001, Moerman, 2009, Konidaris and Barto, 2009, Brunskill and Li, 2014, Hauskrecht et al., 1998].
However, previous approaches have proposed algorithms for learning options to learn or plan faster.
In contrast, our objective is to learn options to repair a MP.
Proposed Algorithm: We introduce a meta-algorithm, Iterative Hierarchical Optimization for
Misspeciﬁed Problems (IHOMP), that uses an RL algorithm as a “black box” to iteratively learn
options that repair MPs. To force the options to specialize, IHOMP uses a partition of the state-space
and trains one option for each class in the partition (Figure 1b). Any arbitrary partitioning scheme can
be used, however the partition impacts performance. During an iteration of IHOMP, an RL algorithm
updates each option. The options may be initialized arbitrarily, but after the ﬁrst iteration options
with access to a goal region or non-zero rewards will learn how to exploit those rewards (e.g., Figure
1b, Iteration 1). On further iterations, the newly acquired options propagate reward back to other
regions of the state-space. Thus, options that previously had no reward signal exploit the rewards
of other options that have received meaningful reward signals (e.g., Figure 1b, Iterations 2 and 5).
Although each option is only learned over a single partition class, it can be initialized in any state.
Why partitions? If all options are trained on all data, then the options would not specialize defeating
the purpose of learning multiple policies. Partitions are necessary to foster specialization. Natural
partitionings arise in many different applications and are often easy to design. Consider navigation
tasks (which we use in this paper for ease of visualization), which are ever-present in robotics [Smart
and Kaelbling, 2002], where partitions naturally lead an agent from one location to another in the
state space. In addition, partitions are well suited to cyclical tasks; that is, tasks that have repeatable
cycles (For example, a yearly cycle of 12 months). Here the state space can be easily partitioned
based on time. Examples include inventory management systems [Mann and Mannor, 2014] as well
as maintenance scheduling of generation units and transmission lines in smart grids [Abiri-Jahromi
et al., 2013, Wu et al., 2010].
Automatically Learning partitions: The availability of a pre-deﬁned partitioning of the state space
is a strong assumption in some domains. We have developed a relaxation to this assumption that can
enable partitions to be learned automatically using Regularized Option Interruption (ROI) [Mankowitz
et al., 2014, Sutton et al., 1999].
2

Figure 1: (a) An episodic MDP with S-shaped state-space and goal region G. (i) Flat approach:
A single policy failing to solve the entire task resulting in a misspeciﬁed model (ii) Hierarchical
approach: Using and combining simple policy representations to solve a task. (b) Learning options,
denoted by black arrows. The domain is partitioned into ﬁve classes (sub-partitions) resulting in
option-set Σ = {σ1, σ2, σ3, σ4, σ5}. In iteration 1, all options except for σ5 (which has immediate
access to the goal region) are arbitrary. In iteration 2, σ5 propagates reward back to σ4. This process
repeats until useful options are learned over the entire state-space.
Contributions: Our main contributions are: (1) Introducing Iterative Hierarchical Optimization for
Misspeciﬁed Problems (IHOMP), which learns options to repair and solve MPs. (2) Theorem 1
shows that IHOMP converges to a near-optimal solution relating the quality of the learned policy
to the quality of the options learned by the “black box” RL algorithm. (3) Theorem 2 proves that
Regularized Option Interruption (ROI) can be safely incorporated into IHOMP. (4) Experiments
demonstrating that, given a misspeciﬁed problem, IHOMP can learn options to repair and solve the
problem. Experiments showing IHOMP-ROI learning partitions and discovering reusable options.
This divide-and-conquer approach may also enable us to scale and solve larger MDPs.
2
Background
Let M = ⟨S, A, P, R, γ⟩be an MDP, where S is a (possibly inﬁnite) set of states, A is a ﬁnite set of
actions, P is a mapping from state-action pairs to probability distributions over next states, R maps
each state-action pair to a reward in [0, 1], and γ ∈[0, 1) is the discount factor. A policy π(a|s) gives
the probability of executing action a ∈A from state s ∈S.
Let M be an MDP. The value function of a policy π with respect to a state s ∈S is V π
M(s) =
E
P∞
t=1 γt−1R(st, at)|s0 = s

where the expectation is taken with respect to the trajectory produced
by following policy π. The value function of a policy π can also be written recursively as
V π
M(s) = Ea∼π(·|s) [R(s, a)] + γEs′∼P (·|s,π) [V π(s′)] ,
(1)
which is known as the Bellman equation. The optimal Bellman equation can be written as V ∗
M(s) =
maxa E [R(s, a)] + γEs′∼P (·|s,π) [V ∗(s′)] . Let ε > 0. We say that a policy π is ε-optimal if
V π
M(s) ≥V ∗
M(s) −ε for all s ∈S. The action-value function of a policy π is deﬁned by Qπ
M(s, a) =
Ea∼π(·|s) [R(s, a)]+γEs′∼P (·|s,π) [V π(s′)] , for a state s ∈S and an action a ∈A, and the optimal
action-value function is denoted by Q∗
M(s, a). Throughout this paper, we will drop the dependence
on M when it is clear from the context.
3
Learning Options
An option is typically deﬁned by a triple o = ⟨I, π, β⟩. However, we want to learn options that are
both specialized to speciﬁc regions of the state-space but potentially reusable if they are useful in
more general contexts. We focus on a special case of options, where an option σ is deﬁned by a tuple
σ = ⟨πθ, β⟩, where πθ is a parametric policy with parameter vector θ and β : S →{0, 1} indicates
whether the option has ﬁnished (β(s) = 1) or not (β(s) = 0) given the current state s ∈S.
Given a set of options Σ with size m ≥1, the inter-option policy is deﬁned by µ : S →[m] where S
is the state-space and [m] is the index set over the options in Σ. An inter-option policy selects which
options to execute from the current state by returning the index of one of the options. By deﬁning
inter-option policies to select an index (rather than the options), we can use the same policy even as
the set of options is adapting.
Figure 1b shows an arbitrary partitioning P, consisting of 5 sub-partitions {Pi|i = 1 · · · 5}, deﬁned
over the original MDP’s state space. Each Pi is initialized with an arbitrary option and its corre-
3

sponding Local-MDP M ′
i. Local-MDP M ′
i (see supplementary material for a full deﬁnition) is an
episodic MDP that terminates once the agent escapes from Pi and upon terminating receives a reward
equal to the value of the state the agent would have transitioned to in the original MDP. Therefore,
we construct a modiﬁed MDP called a Local-MDP and apply a planning or RL algorithm to solve it.
The resulting solution (policy) is a specialized option.
Given a “good” set of options, planning can be signiﬁcantly faster [Sutton et al., 1999, Mann and
Mannor, 2014]. However, in many domains we may not be given a good set of options. Therefore it
is necessary to learn and improve this set of options. In the next section, we introduce an algorithm
for dynamically learning and improving options using iterative hierarchical optimization.
4
Iterative Hierarchical Optimization for Misspeciﬁed Problems (IHOMP)
Iterative Hierarchical Optimization for Misspeciﬁed Problems (IHOMP, Algorithm 1) takes the
original MDP M, a partition P over the state-space and a number of iterations K ≥1 and returns
a pair ⟨µ, Σ⟩containing an inter-option policy µ and a set of options Σ. The number of options
m = |P| is equal to the number of classes (sub-partitions) in the partition P (line 1). The inter-option
policy µ returned by IHOMP is deﬁned (line 2) by µ(s) = arg maxi∈[m] I {s ∈Pi} , where I{·} is
the indicator function returning 1 if its argument is true and 0 otherwise and Pi denotes the ith class
in the partition P. Thus µ simply returns the index of the option associated with the partition class
containing the current state. On line 3, IHOMP initializes Σ with arbitrary options (IHOMP can also
be initialized with options that we believe might be useful to speed up learning).
Algorithm 1 Iterative Hierarchical Optimization for Misspeciﬁed Problems (IHOMP)
Require: M{MDP}, P{Partitioning of S}, K{Iterations}
1: m ←|P| {# of partitions.}
2: µ(s) = arg maxi∈[m] I{s ∈Pi}
3: Initialize Σ with m options. {1 option per partition.}
4: for k = 1, 2, . . . , K do {Do K iterations.}
5:
for i = 1, 2, . . . , m do {One update per option.}
6:
Policy Evaluation:
7:
Evaluate µ with Σ to obtain V ⟨µ,Σ⟩
M
8:
Option Update:
9:
Construct Local-MDP M ′
i from M & V ⟨µ,Σ⟩
M
10:
Solve M ′
i obtaining policy πθ
11:
σ′
i ←⟨πθ, βi⟩
12:
Replace σi in Σ by σ′
i
13:
end for
14: end for
15: return ⟨µ, Σ⟩
Next (lines 4–14), IHOMP performs K iterations. In each iteration, IHOMP updates the options in Σ
(lines 5–13). Note that the value of a option depends on how it is combined with other options. If we
allowed all options to change simultaneously, the options could not reliably propagate value off of
each other. Therefore, IHOMP updates each option individually. Multiple iterations are needed so
that the option set can converge (Figure 1b).
The process of updating an option (lines 7–12) starts by evaluating µ with the current option-set Σ
(line 7). Any number of policy evaluation algorithms could be used here, such as TD(λ) with function
approximation [Sutton and Barto, 1998] or LSTD [Boyan, 2002], modiﬁed to be used with options.
In our experiments, we used a straightforward variant of LSTD [Sorg and Singh, 2010]. Then we
use the original MDP M to construct a Local-MDP M ′ (line 9). Next, IHOMP uses a planning or
RL algorithm to approximately solve the Local-MDP M ′ returning a parametrized policy πθ (line
10). Any planning or RL algorithm for regular MDPs could ﬁll this role provided that it produces
a parametrized policy. However, in our experiments, we used a simple actor-critic PG algorithm,
unless otherwise stated. Then a new option σ′
i = ⟨πθ, βi⟩is created (line 11) where πθ is the policy
derived on line 10 and βi(s) =

0
if s ∈Pi
1
otherwise . The deﬁnition of βi means that the option will
terminate only if it leaves the ith partition. Finally, we update the option set Σ by replacing the ith
4

option with σ′
i (line 12). It is important to note that in IHOMP, updating an option is equivalent to
solving a Local-MDP.
5
Analysis of IHOMP
We provide the ﬁrst convergence guarantee for combining hierarchically and iteratively learning op-
tions in a continuous state MDP using IHOMP (Lemma 1 and Lemma 2, proven in the supplementary
material). We use this guarantee as well as Lemma 2 to prove Theorem 1. This theorem enables us to
analyze the quality of the inter-option policy returned by IHOMP. It turns out that the quality of the
policy depends critically on the quality of the option learning algorithm. An important parameter for
determining the quality of a policy returned by IHOMP is the misspeciﬁcation error deﬁned below.
Deﬁnition 1 Let P be a partition over the target MDP’s state-space. The misspeciﬁcation error is
ηP = max
i∈[m] ηi ,
(2)
where ηi is the smallest ηi ≥0, such that V ∗
M ′
i(s)−V πθ
M ′
i(s) ≤ηi , for all s ∈Pi and πθ is the policy
returned by the option learning algorithm executed on M ′
i.
The misspeciﬁcation error quantiﬁes the quality of the Local-MDP solutions returned by our option
learning algorithm. If we used an exact solver to learn options, then ηP = 0. However, if we use
an approximate solver, then ηP will be non-zero and the quality will depend on the partition P.
Generally, using ﬁner grain partitions will decrease ηP. However, Theorem 1 reveals that adding too
many options can also negatively impact the returned policy’s quality.
Theorem 1 Let ε > 0. If we run IHOMP with partition P for K ≥logγ (ε(1 −γ)) iterations, then
the algorithm returns stitching policy ϕ = ⟨µ, Σ⟩such that
∥V ∗
M −V ϕ
M∥∞≤
mηP
(1 −γ)2 + ε ,
(3)
where m is the number of partition classes in P.
The proof of Theorem 1 is divided into three parts (a complete proof is given in the supplementary
material). The main challenge is that updating one option can impact the value of other options.
Our analysis starts by bounding the impact of updating one option. Note that Σ represents a option
set and Σi represents a option set where we have updated the ith option (corresponding to the ith
partition class Pi) in the set. In the ﬁrst part, we show that the error between V ∗
M, the globally optimal
value function, and V ⟨µ,Σi⟩
M
, is a contraction when s ∈Pi and is bound by ∥V ∗
M −V ⟨µ,Σ⟩
M
∥∞+
ηP
1−γ
otherwise (Lemma 1). In the second part, we apply an inductive argument to show that updating all
m options results in a γ contraction over the entire state space (Lemma 2). In the third part, we apply
this contraction recursively, which proves Theorem 1.
This provides the ﬁrst theoretical guarantees of convergence to a near optimal solution when combin-
ing hierarchically, and iteratively learning, a set of options Σ in a continuous state MDP. Theorem
1 tells us that when the misspeciﬁcation error is small, IHOMP returns a near-optimal inter-option
policy. The ﬁrst term on the right hand side of (3) is the approximation error. This is the loss we pay
for the parametrized class of policies that we learn options over. Since m represents the number of
classes deﬁned by the partition, we now have a formal way of analyzing the effect of the partitioning
structure. In addition, complex options do not need to be designed by a domain expert; only the
partitioning needs to be provided a-priori. The second term is the convergence error. It goes to 0 as
the number of iterations K increases.
The guarantee provided by Theorem 1 may appear similar to [Hauskrecht et al., 1998, Theorem 1].
However, Hauskrecht et al. [1998] derive options only at the beginning of the learning process and do
not update them. On the other hand, IHOMP updates its option-set dynamically by propagating value
throughout the state space during each iteration. Thus, IHOMP does not require prior knowledge of
the optimal value function.
Theorem 1 does not explicitly present the effect of policy evaluation error, which occurs with any
approximate policy evaluation technique. However, if the policy evaluation error is bounded by
ν > 0, then we can simply replace ηP in (3) with (ηP + ν). Again, smaller policy evaluation error
leads to smaller approximation error.
5

6
Learning Partitions via Regularized Option Interruption
So far IHOMP has assumed a partition is given a-priori. However, it may be non-trivial to design
a partition and, in many cases, the partition may be sub-optimal. To relax this assumption, we
incorporate Regularized Option Interruption (ROI) [Mankowitz et al., 2014] into this work to enable
IHOMP to automatically learn a near-optimal partition from an initially misspeciﬁed problem.
IHOMP keeps track of the action value function Q⟨µ,Σ⟩(s, j) which represents the expected value of
being in state s ∈S and executing option j, given the inter-option policy µ and option set Σ. ROI
uses this estimate of the action-value function to enable the agent to choose when to switch options
according to the following termination rule:
βj(s, t) =

1
if Q⟨µ,Σ⟩(s, j) < V ⟨µ,Σ⟩(s) −ρ
0
otherwise .
(4)
Figure 2: Regularized Option Interruption
(ROI): (a) The initial misspeciﬁed partition
pre-deﬁned by the user. (b) The actual optimal
partitioning for the task. (c) The partition
learned using ROI. If option 1 is executing,
the option will continue to execute at location
y and will terminate at location x. At this
point option 3 will begin to execute.
Here βj(s, t) corresponds to the termination prob-
ability of the jth option partition and V ⟨µ,Σ⟩(s) =
maxi∈[m] Q⟨µ,Σ⟩(s, i). This rule is illustrated in Fig-
ure 2. A user has designed a partition resulting in
a MP (Figure 2a) compared to the optimal parti-
tion for this domain (Figure 2b). IHOMP applies
ROI to ‘modify’ the initial partition into the optimal
one. By learning the optimal action-value function
Q⟨∗,µ,Σ⟩(s, j), IHOMP builds a near-optimal parti-
tion (Figure 2c) that is implicitly stored within this
action-value function. That is, if the agent is execut-
ing an option in partition class 1, and the value of
continuing with option 1, Q⟨µ,Σ⟩(s, 1), is less than
V ⟨µ,Σ⟩(s)−ρ for some regularization function ρ (see
the x location in Figure 2c), then switch to the new
option partition (βj(s, t) = 1). Otherwise, continue
executing the current option (see the y location in
Figure 2c).
This leads to a new algorithm IHOMP-ROI (IHOMP
with Regularized Option Interruption). The algorithm
can be found in the supplementary material. The
key difference between IHOMP and IHOMP-ROI is
applying ROI during the policy evaluation step after
each of the m options have been updated. IHOMP-ROI automatically learns an improved partition
between iterations. We show that ROI can be safely incorporated into IHOMP in Theorem 2. The
theorem shows that incorporating ROI can only improve the policy produced by IHOMP. The full
proof is given in the supplementary material.
Theorem 2 (IHOMP-ROI Approximate Convergence) Eq. (3) also holds for IHOMP-ROI.
7
Experiments and Results
We performed experiments on three well-known RL benchmarks: Mountain Car (MC), Puddle
World (PW) [Sutton, 1996] and the Pinball domain [Konidaris and Barto, 2009]. We also perform
experiments in a sub-domain of Minecraft 2. The MC and Minecraft domains have similar results
to PW and therefore have been moved to the supplementary material. We use two variations for
the Pinball domain, namely maze-world (moved to supplementary material), which we created, and
pinball-world which is one of the standard pinball benchmark domains. Finally, we created a domain
which we call the Two Rooms domain to demonstrate how IHOMP-ROI can improve partitions.
In each experiment, we deﬁned a MP, where no ﬂat policy is adequate, and in some of the tasks,
cannot solve the task at all. These experiments simulate situations where the policy representation is
2https://minecraft.net/en/
6

Figure 3: (a) Puddle World domain. (b) The average reward for IHOMPcompared to the solution
obtained by a ﬂat policy in the initially misspeciﬁed problem and an approximately optimal policy
derived using Q-learning. (c) The average cost (negative reward) for each grid partition.
constrained to avoid overﬁtting, manage system constraints, or coping with poorly designed features.
In each case, IHOMP learns a signiﬁcantly better policy compared to the non-hierarchical approach.
In the Two Rooms domain, IHOMP-ROI improves the initial partition. Our experiments demonstrate
potential to scale up to higher dimensional domains by hierarchically combining options over simple
representations (A Video of IHOMP solving the Pinball tasks and the Minecraft sub-domain can be
found in the supplementary material).
IHOMP is a meta-algorithm. We provide an algorithm for Policy Evaluation (PE) and Policy Learning
(PL). For the MC and PW domains, we used SMDP-LSTD [Sorg and Singh, 2010] for PE and a
modiﬁed version of Regular-Gradient Actor-Critic (RG-AC) [Bhatnagar et al., 2009] for PL (see
supplementary material for details). In the Pinball domains, we used Nearest-Neighbor Function
Approximation (NN-FA) for PE and UCB Random Policy Search (UCB-RPS) for PL. In the two
rooms domain, we use a variation of LSTDQ with Option Interruption for PE and RG-AC for PL.
For the MC, PW, and Two Rooms domains, each intra-option policy is represented as a probability
distribution over actions (independent of the state). We compare their performance to the original
misspeciﬁed problem using a ﬂat policy with the same representation. Grid-like partitions are
generated for each task. Binary-grid features are used to estimate the value function. In the Pinball
domains, each option is represented by 5 polynomial features corresponding to each state dimension
and a bias term. The value function is represented by a KD-Tree containing 1000 state-value
pairs uniformly sampled in the domain. A value for a particular state is obtained by assigning the
value of the nearest neighbor to that state that is contained within the KD-tree. These are example
representations. In principal, any value function and policy representation that is representative of the
domain can be utilized.
Puddle World: Puddle World is a continuous 2-dimensional world containing two puddles as shown
in Figure 3a. A successful agent (red ball) should navigate to the goal location (blue square), avoiding
the puddles. The state space is the ⟨x, y⟩location of the agent. Initially, the agent is provided with a
misspeciﬁed problem. That is, a ﬂat policy that can only move in a single direction (thus it cannot
avoid the puddles). Figure 3b compares this ﬂat policy with IHOMP (for a 2 × 2 grid partition (Four
options)). The ﬂat policy achieves low average reward. However, IHOMP turns the ﬂat policy into
options and hierarchically composes these options together, resulting in a richer solution space and a
higher average reward as seen in Figure 3b. This is comparable to the approximately optimal average
reward attained by executing Approximate Value Iteration (AVI) for a huge number of iterations.
In this experiment IHOMP is not initiated in the partition class containing the goal state but still
achieves near-optimal convergence after only 2 iterations.
Figure 3c compares the performance of different partitions where a 1 × 1 grid represents the ﬂat
policy of the initially misspeciﬁed problem. The option learning error ηP is signiﬁcantly smaller for
all the partitions greater than 1 × 1, resulting in lower cost. On the other hand, according to Theorem
1, adding more options m increases the cost. A trade off therefore exists between ηP and m. In
practice, ηP tends to dominate m. In addition to the trade off, the importance of the partition design
is evident when analyzing the cost of the 3 × 3 and 4 × 4 grids. In this scenario, the 3 × 3 partition
design is better suited to Puddle World than the 4 × 4 partition, resulting in lower cost.
Pinball: We tested IHOMP on the challenging pinball-world task (Figure 4a) Konidaris and Barto
[2009]. The agent is initially provided with a 5-feature ﬂat policy ⟨1, x, y, ˙x, ˙y⟩. This results in a
misspeciﬁed problem as the agent is unable to solve the task using this limited representation as
shown by the average reward in Figure 4b. Using IHOMP with a 4 × 3 × 1 × 1 grid, 12 options were
7

Pinball-world
(a)
(b)
(c)
Average Rewrad
0
5
10
15
x position
0
5
10
15
y position
Value
5000
10000
Optimal
LSB
Flat Policy
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
Figure 4: (a) Pinball domain. (b) Average reward for IHOMP. IHOMP converges after a single
iteration as we start IHOMP in the partition containing the goal. (c) The learned value function.
Figure 5: (a) Two Rooms domain (b) Two Rooms domain with a sub-optimal partition after per-
forming IHOMP (c) The learned partition after running IHOMP-ROI (d) The average reward from
executing IHOMP-ROI compared to IHOMP without ROI and the ﬂat policy.
learned. IHOMP clearly outperforms the ﬂat policy as shown in Figure 4b. It is less than optimal but
still manages to sufﬁciently perform the task (see value function, Figure 4c). The drop in performance
is due to a complicated obstacle setup, non-linear dynamics and partition design. Nevertheless, this
shows that IHOMP can produce a reasonable solution with a limited representation.
Improving Partitions: Providing a ‘good’ option partitioning a-priori is a strong assumption. It
may be non-trivial to design the partitioning especially in continuous, high-dimensional domains. A
sub-optimal partitioning may still mitigate misspeciﬁcation, but it will not result in a near-optimal
solution. To relax this assumption, we have incorporated Regularized Option Interruption into
IHOMP to produce the IHOMP-ROI Algorithm. This algorithm learns the options and improves the
partition, effectively determining where the options should be executed in the state space.
We tested IHOMP-ROI on the two rooms domain shown in Figure 5a. The agent (red ball) needs to
navigate to the goal region (blue square). The policy parameterization is limited to a distribution over
actions (moving in a single direction). This limited representation results in a MP as the agent is unable
to traverse between the two rooms. If we use IHOMP with a sub-optimal partitioning containing
two options as shown by the red and green cells in Figure 5b, the problem is still misspeciﬁed. Here,
the agent leaves the red cell and immediately gets trapped behind the wall whilst in the green cell.
Using IHOMP-ROI, as shown in Figure 5c, the agent learns both the options and a partition such
that the agent can navigate to the goal. The green region in the bottom left corner comes about as a
function approximation error but does not prevent the agent from reaching the goal. If reader looks
carefully in Figure 5c, they will notice something unexpected. The optimal partitioning learned for
the Two Rooms domain includes executing the red option in region B. This is intuitive given the
parameterizations learned for each of the options. The red option has a dominant right action whereas
the green option has a dominant upward action. When the agent in region B, it makes more sense to
execute the red option to reach the goal. Thus, IHOMP-ROI provides an effective way to, not only
learn an optimal partition, but to also discover where options should be reused.
8
Discussion
We introduced IHOMP a RL planning algorithm for iteratively learning options and an inter-option
policy [Sutton et al., 1999] to repair a MP. We provide theoretical results for IHOMP that directly
relate the quality of the ﬁnal inter-option policy to the misspeciﬁcation error. IHOMP is the ﬁrst
algorithm that provides theoretical convergence guarantees while iteratively learning a set of options
in a continuous state space. In addition, we have developed IHOMP-ROI which makes use of
regularized option interruption [Sutton et al., 1999, Mankowitz et al., 2014] to learn an improved
partition to solve an initially misspeciﬁed problem. IHOMP-ROI is also able to discover regions
in the state space where the options should be reused. In high-dimensional domains, partitions
can be learned from expert demonstrations [Abbeel and Ng, 2005] and intra-option policies can be
8

represented as Deep Q-Networks [Mnih, 2015]. Option reuse can be especially useful for transfer
learning [Tessler et al., 2016] and multi-agent settings [Garant et al., 2015].
