Identification of Regulatory Requirements
Relevant to Business Processes:
A Comparative Study on Generative AI,
Embedding-based Ranking, Crowd and
Expert-driven Methods
Catherine Sai1, Shazia Sadiq2, Lei Han2, Gianluca Demartini2, and
Stefanie Rinderle-Ma1
1TUM School of Computation, Information and Technology,
Technical University of Munich, Garching, Germany,

2School of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering,
University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia,

Abstract
Organizations face the challenge of ensuring compliance with an in-
creasing amount of requirements from various regulatory documents. Which
requirements are relevant depends on aspects such as the geographic lo-
cation of the organization, its domain, size, and business processes. Con-
sidering these contextual factors, as a first step, relevant documents (e.g.,
laws, regulations, directives, policies) are identified, followed by a more
detailed analysis of which parts of the identified documents are relevant
for which step of a given business process. Nowadays the identification
of regulatory requirements relevant to business processes is mostly done
manually by domain and legal experts, posing a tremendous effort on
them, especially for a large number of regulatory documents which might
frequently change. Hence, this work examines how legal and domain ex-
perts can be assisted in the assessment of relevant requirements. For this,
we compare an embedding-based NLP ranking method, a generative AI
method using GPT-4, and a crowdsourced method with the purely manual
method of creating relevancy labels by experts. The proposed methods are
evaluated based on two case studies: an Australian insurance case created
with domain experts and a global banking use case, adapted from SAP
Signavio’s workflow example of an international guideline. A gold stan-
dard is created for both BPMN2.0 processes and matched to real-world
1
arXiv:2401.02986v1  [cs.CL]  2 Jan 2024

textual requirements from multiple regulatory documents.
The evalu-
ation and discussion provide insights into strengths and weaknesses of
each method regarding applicability, automation, transparency, and re-
producibility and provide guidelines on which method combinations will
maximize benefits for given characteristics such as process usage, impact,
and dynamics of an application scenario.
1
Motivation
In our globalized world, organizations are faced with keeping track of
an increasing amount of requirements from various sources in order to
stay compliant. Yet, identifying relevant requirements for a business pro-
cess from vast amounts of documents requires extensive manual work by
highly qualified legal and domain experts [12, 43]. Recent work [41] defines
13 Regulatory Compliance Assessment Solution Requirements (RCASR)
where RCASR2 – RCASR8 are investigated in order to provide a fine-
granular assessment of compliance between regulatory documents and
their realizations, e.g., handbooks. In this work, we investigate RCASR
1 (regulatory document relevance) and RCASR 2 (content relevance) by
identifying which regulatory documents a company needs to comply with
and the identification of which part of the document is relevant for a com-
pany. As businesses become increasingly diverse we further analyze the
relevance within the business by not only identifying if a regulatory text
is relevant for the entire organization but for a specific process, the sub-
processes within the process, and the tasks and throwing events (as these
are the active elements) within each sub-process (cf. Fig. 1).
Our work aims to develop novel technological solutions to help re-
duce compliance burdens and breaches. Relevance identification is, even
at the process level a challenging and high-stakes task that is currently
performed manually by experts [12]. While it is difficult to make the iden-
tification fully automatic, we study if crowd workers are capable of com-
pleting (partial) identification tasks, as they have been proven to be able
to create high-quality annotations in complex data problems [10, 53, 6].
Additionally, we evaluate the capabilities of two automated methods: an
embedding-based NLP ranking and generative AI as a possible aid for
the experts and crowd to better cope with the vast amounts of regulatory
texts. Specifically, the study focuses on the design of a hybrid system to
aid domain experts in their compliance assessments. We analyze for which
process level granularity (Fig. 1) relevance can be identified in sufficient
quality and how the selected methods can be used and possibly combined
to best support the human experts.
Consequently, this work offers the following contributions:
• publicly available data set with two real-world use cases as BPMN2.0
models, process descriptions on all three levels (Fig.
1), and the
mapped open-access regulatory text passages with their relevancy
label for all process levels, aiming to facilitate further research in
the area
• analysis of the feasibility of state-of-the-art NLP methods to retrieve
2

regulatory relevant texts in a complex legal and business setting for
multiple levels of business process detail
• analysis of the feasibility of generative AI to answer questions about
regulatory relevance in a complex legal and business setting for mul-
tiple levels of business process detail
• analysis of the feasibility of crowdsourcing to identify relevancy in
a complex legal and business setting for multiple levels of business
process detail
• a novel approach for the identification of relevance for specific pro-
cess aspects for natural language regulatory requirements, compar-
ing multiple methods and possible combinations of these, resulting
in scenario-based application recommendations
The paper is structured as follows: The analyzed aspects and approach
are presented in Sect.
2, study design.
This is followed by Sect.
3,
describing the methods used for the approach.
Section 4 provides the
study implementation details. Evaluation and discussion of the findings
are presented in Sect. 5 and 6. Section7 discusses related work, followed
by Sect. 8 concluding the paper.
2
Study Design
2.1
Analyzed Aspects
The diversity of regulatory documents [43] should be reflected in the
data set by containing regulatory text paragraphs from multiple docu-
ments of varying origins. Aside from the structure, level of detail, and
similar aspects, in terms of relevance identification documents can i.a.
vary depending on their geographic region (e.g., country) and domain of
applicability.
This study includes regulatory documents from different
countries and domains as well as domain-independent documents. Ad-
ditionally, we differentiate between external documents (i.e., laws, regu-
lations, directives) that originate from outside the business and internal
documents that only apply to the business that created them. All internal
documents are automatically business-relevant, but might not be relevant
for the process at hand. A further aspect is the availability of the docu-
ments. The majority of internal documents is a business secret or at least
not publicly available. Due to the crowd-working task and to increase
transparency for this publication, only publicly available (meaning open
access) documents were included in the analysis. Therefore the following
3 groups of regulatory documents are represented in the study, reflecting
different combinations of relevance:
• Group A contains internal and external documents that are both,
business-relevant and process-relevant.
• Group B contains internal and external documents that are business-relevant
and process-irrelevant.
• Group C contains external documents that are business-irrelevant
and process-irrelevant.
3

A random selection of all textual content paragraphs from the de-
scribed documents is extracted, excluding table of contents, tables, and
definitions. As the regulatory text passages are extracted from different
documents, some context about the regulatory document (title, section ti-
tle, subsection) is included together with the document meta-information
(applicability) mentioned above.
Figure 1: Overview of study aspects analyzed
The relevance judgement is analyzed for different levels of detail,
level 0 being the most general and level 3 the most specific. Level 0 iden-
tifies relevance for the business as a whole, while level 1 assesses if a reg-
ulatory requirement is relevant for a specific process within the business.
Even more detail is provided by level 2, which identifies if a requirement
is relevant for a sub-process within a process. Finally, level 3 displays
the deepest aspect of a process by identifying relevance for a specific task
or throwing event. Through this, we want to analyze if the methods are
feasible for all or only certain levels of relevance identification and identify
the necessary circumstances for applicability.
Furthermore, interviews with domain experts led us to distinguish two
kinds of relevance: Compliance relevance is a description of an action
an organization has to fulfill in order to be compliant with a regulation
(relevance in the stricter sense). Informative relevance applies, when texts
contain information related to the process but do not require a clear action
by the organization (e.g. customer obligations in order to fulfill policy
requirements).
For the business side, processes with at least one, better multiple
relevant regulatory documents should be chosen. The processes are visu-
alized in BPMN2.0 and contain textual descriptions at all three process
levels (level 1-3, cf. Fig. 1) as “textual process descriptions are widely
used in organizations” and hence “provide a valuable source for process
analysis, such as compliance checking” [45].
Four methods are applied for the identification of a relevant text pas-
sage from a regulatory document for a given process of an organization.
If the regulatory text is relevant for the business process, the relevance of
the sub-processes and finally the specific tasks is also identified. This way
we assess the relevance identification capabilities for three levels of detail
(cf. Fig. 1). As this study’s focus lies on identifying relevant regulatory
texts for processes (and their more detailed aspects), level 0 (business
4

relevance) is not explicitly analyzed. However, if a regulatory text is rel-
evant for a business process (level 1) it is consequently also relevant for
the business (level 0).
The business information includes textual process descriptions for all
three process levels (Fig. 1), as well as also basic information about the
business (location, domain, size). Additionally, for the crowd study a vi-
sual BPMN2.0 (bpmn.org) representation of the root process is included.
If the BPMN2.0 model or any textual descriptions are not available, they
need to be created manually by domain experts, possibly aided by gener-
ative AI. The presented design ensures that the approach is validated by
sources from various origins.
2.2
Analysis Approach
The study aims at improving the relevance identification of regulatory
texts for business processes. This task is currently performed manually
by an extensive expert analysis of potentially relevant regulatory texts.
One dimension for improvement that the study is capturing is therefore
the direction towards a (semi-)automated approach, shown in the hor-
izontal axis of Fig.
2.
Furthermore, the improvement deals with the
regulatory compliance of businesses. This is a critical field where viola-
tions are quickly resulting in a big impact on the business, often both
financially and in reputation aspects. Therefore, the proposed support
for the experts also needs to be understandable to a certain degree: how
does a method reach its relevance judgment? Additionally, the legal rel-
evance judgment should be consistent in order to be reliable, meaning a
method should reach the same relevance judgment when given the same
input. This dimension is measured by the vertical axis of transparency
and reproducibility (cf. Fig. 2).
Figure 2: Overview of methods applied for process relevance identification
The Expert Analysis is the basis for the approach as on the one
5

hand it is the current standard way to perform the relevance judgment
and on the other hand, it is necessary to create the gold standard in order
to perform and evaluate the other methods in a quantitative manner.
As stated before this method is purely manual and also transparent and
reproducible as the experts come to reasoned relevance judgments and
document these.
As a second method, our approach analyses the applicability of state-
of-the-art natural language processing legal information retrieval (SOTA
NLP LIR), ranking the regulatory texts according to their relevance
for the process query. This can be completely automated and still offers
full reproducibility and is also explainable and transparent in the way it
calculates the relevance ranking based on word embeddings.
Large language models (LLMs) are currently considered the best sup-
portive system for various tasks that were performed manually thus far
and have also shown great results for classifying texts (cf. Sect. 7) this
study analyses their capability to support the relevance identification for
business processes. Similar to the SOTA NLP LIR method, LLMs only
need a well-designed prompt to perform their relevance judgment which
can be automatically generated from the process information, they are
thus a completely automated solution. However, the LLM relevance judg-
ment can differ if given the same prompt multiple times and it is not clear
how the relevance is calculated.
For the fourth method, we analyze if the relevance judgment could be
supported in a Crowd study by untrained workers, given a specific task
on a complex matter. As experts are rare and expensive resources, crowd
studies have shown to be a valuable aid or even alternative for multiple
tasks currently performed by skilled workers (cf. Sect. 7). However, it
is not clear how the crowd workers reach their relevance judgment and
if they would come to the same conclusion if given the same information
a second time. Thus, they are considered a manual, intransparent, and
irreproducible method.
Without defined business processes use cases, a collection of poten-
tially relevant regulatory text passages and their relevancy matching it is
not possible to test the SOTA NLP LIR, LLM or Crowd Study method.
The three newly presented methods depend on the information retained
in the Expert Analysis. Thus, the three methods (SOTA NLP LIR, LLM,
Crowd study) for the application of relevance judgment will be evaluated
based on the gold standard (Expert Analysis) in quantitative terms (cf.
Sect. 5) and the qualitative dimensions of automation and transparen-
cy/reproducibility (cf. Sect. 6). However, the Expert Analysis is also an
independent method to determine relevance by itself, namely the method
currently used by the industry, and is thus analyzed as one of four methods
in this study.
3
Methods
In the following, the conceptual background of the four methods depicted
in Fig. 2 is described in more detail.
6

3.1
Expert Analysis
[12] compare the ability of domain experts, legal experts, and laypersons
(non-experts) to assess similarity and interpret legal requirements and
definitions. Legal experts achieve the highest rates, followed by domain
experts. [43] conduct interviews with five business auditors in order to as-
sess how the identification of relevant regulatory documents for an internal
audit is performed in organizations. According to [43] at the beginning
of an audit, it is not clear which and how many regulatory documents
need to be considered for compliance. The collection of documents also
increases iteratively as one document refers to another document. Thus,
the “search for [...] regulatory documents is often performed exploratively
and can take some time” [43]. For this study, we interviewed three domain
experts from the insurance industry about their actions to ensure regu-
latory compliance of their processes. The insurance company currently
works with an external provider with a big team of legal experts that
identifies relevant regulatory text passages per quality unit of a process.
Although we did not speak with the legal experts directly, we received
their insights implicitly from the domain experts.
The combined challenges [C] elicited from [43, 12] and our interviews
are:
• high degree of manual work/ lack of automation approaches [C1]
• lack of context as the search for relevant documents is often only
based on a few keywords which although the context of the terms
“plays an essential role” [43] [C2]
• need for highly skilled workers to correctly interpret legal require-
ments, which are costly and hard to obtain [12] [C3]
• decentralized data (multiple tools, excel sheets, documents) [C4]
• variety of regulatory documents which “differ greatly in terms
of subject matter as well as structure, vocabulary, and level of detail”
[43] [C5]
Based on these challenges and the dimensions automation and trans-
parency/reproducibility (cf.
Fig.
2), we select the other methods to
be compared in the study. The aim is a semi-automated approach that
supports the experts, knowing that full automation is neither technologi-
cally feasible nor desired from a responsibility and reliability point of view
[C1+C3]. We aim at an approach that can deal with various regulatory
documents by not being built on custom dictionaries or rules [C4+C5].
The identification input also includes as much context information, as far
as feasible by the methods nature [C2].
Furthermore, together with the experts, suitable business processes
and regulatory documents (cf. Sect. 2.1) need to be identified and the
gold standard is created. The procedure is, that for each of the regulatory
text paragraphs, the relevancy type (irrelevant, compliance relevant, or
informative relevant) is decided for the process (level 1). The processes
identified as relevant are then further labeled at process levels 2 and 3 (cf.
Fig. 1).
7

3.2
SOTA NLP LIR
Legal Information Retrieval (LIR) is concerned with identifying the top
k relevant documents or case laws. Missing one document is not severe
as this would only mean that not each related case from the past was
identified to review it for potentially relevant information. This differs
from this study’s application: it is extremely important not to miss any
relevant regulatory texts as this could lead to compliance issues. However,
as both applications aim at identifying relevance of legal text and no
method exists yet for the business process application, with this method
we test the ability of the in recent publications [43, 2] most promising
NLP LIR approaches.
There are two main methods to perform the similarity computation for
information retrieval: lexical document retrieval systems, which need an
exact match, and semantic document retrieval systems, which are able to
identify semantically similar terms [16, 27]. Furthermore, recent, related
work [43, 2] identifies the combination of a lexical and semantic search
with a cross encoder re-ranking as most promising to retrieve potentially
relevant text passages based on an input query, in our case the process(-
events) description text. We, therefore, implement two state-of-the-art
NLP LIR methods, to use the better performing method as a baseline
approach for retrieving relevant legal texts for a given process and its
elements.
The algorithms described in this method are not novel, yet the appli-
cation this study applies them to is. Other publications apply these or
similar methods to e.g., retrieve supporting case laws based on a query
case (cf. COLIEE 2023 [11]) or [43] for retrieving relevant German regu-
latory documents for an audit based on key phrases from auditors. Yet,
to the best of our knowledge no approach exists, that analyses the ap-
plicability of these methods for the retrieval of relevant regulatory texts
based on detailed business process information. Our application scenario
also poses new challenges compared to the existing use cases as with the
complex business process context, we have more information to consider
for the query design than, e.g., a 2–3 word key phrase.
Figure 3: SOTA NLP LIR design inspired by [38, 43]
Figure 3 illustrates the steps of the SOTA NLP LIR methods for
8

relevance judgment concerning regulatory business process requirements.
Method A is based on a lexical search with BM25, re-ranking the re-
trieved passages with semantic Cross-Encoder. Method B already bases
the initial retrieval stage on semantic search with Bi-Encoder and also
re-ranks all retrieved passages with the semantic based Cross-Encoder. In
the following the elements of the methods are explained briefly.
BM25 ranking function is a lexical document retrieval system. It is
based on the “bag-of-words” approach in NLP, where the words in a text
are considered independent of their position in the text like all the words
of a text were put into a bag [39]. Using measures like term frequency
(TF) and inverse document frequency (IDF), the words are transformed
in a mathematical representation (also called embedding) and weighed in
a certain formula to evaluate their ranking.
Sentence Transformer is a transformer-based embedding frame-
work that, in contrast to BM25, takes the context of the word (e.g. sur-
rounding words) into consideration [38]. Both semantic components (Bi-
Encoder and Cross-Encoder) rely on sentence-transformer models. The
Bi-Encoder [38] passes the texts independently to Sentence-Transformer
and compares the resulting embeddings based on cosine similarity. This
set-up is less computational intensive (than, e.g., Cross-Encoder) and thus
recommended for information retrieval tasks as an initial step to retrieve
a pre-selection of potentially relevant texts from a larger collection.
In comparison, Cross-Encoder [38], like Bi-Encoder is a semantics
based encoder, but “Cross-Encoder does not produce a sentence embed-
ding” 1. Both texts are passed together to the Sentence-Transformer and
the result is a similarity classification between 0 and 1. Cross-Encoders
deliver better results in relevancy ranking. However, they are too compu-
tationally intensive to use them directly on large document collections.
3.3
Generative AI Study
For the generative AI Study a zero-shot approach is chosen, meaning only
the first response from GPT-4 is considered, no regenerate responses or
further information is given. Zero-shot approaches have performed well
for multiple tasks [26] and for the alternative of few-shot learning, use
case specific examples would need to be created which would be against
our design principle of creating an approach as general and automated as
possible. In this kind of setup, the prompt used for the generation needs
to be carefully designed.
[44] propose a “legal prompt stack”, where the prompt should con-
sist of the information needed to answer the task (in their case the legal
document text), in our case the business context and requirements text.
Additionally, a description of what the model is expected to do is required.
In [4] prompt engineering for BPM applications is discussed, stating that
a task description is needed for zero-shot design and that prompt tem-
plates are task specific.
They also state that is an open challenge to
create prompt templates for business processes and their complex repre-
sentations.
1https://www.sbert.net/examples/applications/cross-encoder/README.html
9

Figure 4: Prompt design components in this study
Based on these existing prompt proposals and our application setting,
we design the prompt consists of 3 parts, as shown in Fig. 4: 1) a de-
scription of the task to be performed, 2) information about the business
process: organizational context, the process description, sub-process de-
scriptions and event descriptions, 3) information about the regulation:
one paragraph from a regulatory text and regulatory document context
information. Part 1) stays the same for all runs, 2) is the same per process
and 3) is changed for each run with a different regulatory document text.
The prompt is created in three iterations. After each iteration, the results
are evaluated on a small test set of 12 regulatory texts. Depending on this
analysis the prompt is adjusted and evaluated again.
3.4
Crowd study
As crowdsourcing has provided large opportunities to generate manual
annotations at scale [6], we study the possibility of harvesting the “wisdom
of crowds” in relevance assessment for regulatory requirement text for
business processes. Hence, we design a crowdsourcing task that allows
crowd workers to provide manual annotations. Considering the complexity
of matching each piece of regulatory text to low-level business process
activities, we design the task in a two-phase fashion:
• (Phase-1) Each worker is asked to assess the relevance of a given
piece of regulatory requirement text with respect to a given business
process, and, if relevant, identify which (one or more) sub-processes
in the process the given text is most relevant to; and
• (Phase-2) Each worker is asked to identify which (one or more) par-
ticular activities in the sub-process the given text is most relevant to,
and the type of relevance, i.e., informative relevance or compliance
relevance.
Figure 5 shows the overall procedure of our crowdsourcing experi-
ments.
As a process model can aid our understanding of the overall
business process, we first introduce the BPMN2.0 notations that were
used through two simple examples: organizing a meeting, and restaurant
handling an order.
We provide a textual description for each of these
10

Figure 5: Procedure of the crowd study
notations. Then, the participating crowd workers are presented with the
actual task of the relevance assessment.
In the task, we present both the textual description as well as the root
process in BPMN2.0 for the studied use cases. Note that we publish the
two-phase tasks one after another. That is, having collected the annota-
tions from the Phase-1 task, we publish the Phase-2 task by using the text
that has already been judged as relevant. In the Phase-2 task, the workers
need to match the given text to relevant activities in the sub-processes.
In both tasks, all workers are required to provide a textual justification
for their selection.
3.5
Comparative Remarks
All methods need to identify the same amount of relevant text paragraphs.
For the automated approaches SOTA NLP LIR and LLMs, more irrelevant
text paragraphs are added to the input data to create a situation closer to
the actual business setting. The two automated methods share the same
input information provided in different forms as LLMs are designed to
handle large amounts of context data while the existing LIR methods are
based on comparably very short queries.
4
Study Implementation
The created data sets, prompts for the generative AI and the SOTA NLP
implementation are publicly available on Github2.
4.1
Expert Analysis
Following the described criteria (cf. Sect. 2) and procedure (cf. Sect.
3.1) two suitable business processes and a composition of relevant and
irrelevant regulatory documents for these are identified and a gold stan-
dard is created.
For use case 1 the gold standard is manually created
and reviewed with three insurance domain experts, for use case 2 the gold
standard is created and reviewed by two business process experts.
2https://anonymous.4open.science/r/regulatory_relevance4process-D73C
11

4.1.1
Regulatory requirements
This study analyzes text paragraphs from 7 Australian regulatory docu-
ments (e.g., the “Fair Work Act 2009”) as well as one business internal
document that is publicly available. The later document is anonymized
for the study (e.g., company name replaced by a placeholder, company
address deleted) and is excluded from the published data set to preserve
the anonymity of our industry cooperation partner.
4.1.2
Business process
In 2021, [52] identified 404 primary studies for their survey in the field
of Natural Language Processing for Requirements Engineering. However,
only 7% of these were evaluated in an industrial setting, which “highlights
a general lack of industrial evaluation of NLP4RE research results” [52].
Therefore, for this study, we cooperate with an industry partner from the
insurance domain for use case 1.
Use case 1: travel insurance claims
The use case of travel in-
surance claims needs to comply with multiple regulatory documents. As
neither a process model nor textual process descriptions existed at our
industry partner, we create them together with the domain experts in an
iterative manner.
The process deals with the handling of travel claims customers might
make against their travel insurance company. It can be grouped in 7 sub-
processes including the registration of the claim at the insurer, ensuring
all required information is present, communicating with the customer,
deciding about the eligibility and calculating a payout amount as well as
random quality checks both during and after the payout. Figure 6 displays
the root process.
Figure 6: Travel insurance claim process modeled with domain experts from an
Australian insurance company, modeled with SAP Signavio
Use case 2:
know your customer
The Know Your Customer
(KYC) use case of the banking industry is chosen as it is an international
standard that needs to comply with different regulatory documents de-
pending on the application country which made it an interesting case for
our application. The BPMN2.0 model (cf. Fig. 7) is based on an SAP
Signavio workflow of KYC3, enriched with textual descriptions created by
academic staff and generative AI.
3https://www.signavio.com/de/workflow-beispiele/bankingknow-customer-kyc/
12

Figure 7: KYC process model based on SAP Signavio workflow example
KYC describes a process in the financial domain to ensure a potential
customer’s identification and due diligence procedures4.
When a new
bank account is created, personal information needs to be reviewed and
validated through various checks and confirmations. Depending on the
analysis, the new customer might be manually reviewed, following a set
of guidelines for acceptability and risk level before being on-boarded and
welcomed or declined.
4.2
SOTA NLP LIR
The two embedding-based ranking methods are implemented as described
in Sect. 3.2. Table 1 illustrates the input data used. For the prompt, the
business process descriptions were used, e.g. for use case 1, level 3: the
31 task descriptions were used individually as prompt to rank the 489
regulatory text passages (of use case 1) in their relevance for the analyzed
task description.
Table 1: Input data by process level and regulatory text group for the two
automated methods
Business data
Regulatory text
Lvl 1
Lvl 2
Lvl 3
10% Grp. A
45%
45%
(100%)
Process
process
sub-pr.
tasks
Compl. rel.
Inform. rel.
Grp. B
Grp. C
total
1: Insurance
1
7
31
21
28
220
220
489
2: Banking
1
7
19
24
7
140
140
311
4.3
GPT-4
The prompts are created based on the application task, as well as the
information about the processes and regulatory documents from the use
cases as described in Sect. 3.3. After the initial generation, for iteration 2,
the task description is enriched with the information to only match clear
relations between regulatory text and business process. Additionally, the
information about the regulatory text is extended with the automatically
4https://corpgov.law.harvard.edu/2016/02/07/fincen-know-your-customer-requirements/
13

generated passages about the regulatory documents content and appli-
cability. For iteration 3, the changes from iteration 2 are kept and the
task description is extended by the information that recall is the most
important measurement for this task. The final prompts contain between
1500-2300 words, depending on the business case and requirements text.
After three iterations, the resulting prompt is run on all 489 for case study
1 and 311 for case study 2 and evaluated against the gold standard. The
input data used for the prompts is the same as for the SOTA NLP LIR
method and shown in Tab. 1.
4.4
Crowd Study
Using the task design described in Sect. 3.4, we deploy our crowdsourcing
experiments on Amazon MTurk (AMT), cf. Fig. 8 and Fig. 9.
Figure 8: Simplified example of process introduction in crowd study
Figure 9: Screenshot of Phase-1 task.
We implement three quality checks in both the Phase-1 and Phase-2
task:
• Two initial test questions to ensure the worker has understood the
notations that are used in the examples, which are implemented
14

through the format of binary selection;
• Attention checks by the embedded JavaScript logger5, by which
among the selection alternatives we embed one option stating “Do
not click on this option at any time” and we check if the worker has
ever clicked on this option; and
• Semantic dependency of the selected options, where we follow exist-
ing crowdsourcing task design that only certain combinations of the
answers make sense [21] (e.g., it does not make sense if the worker
selects both “Not relevant” and any labels indicating relevance).
These quality checks are performed in a post-experiment manner,
which means that all workers are paid at the end of the task and, for those
who failed the checks, we re-publish their task on AMT. To incentivize
workers to provide high-quality annotations, we manually check their pro-
vided justifications and send them bonus rewards if their justification is
informative. A total of 240 regulatory paragraphs is analyzed this way by
the selected crowd workers, for details about the data composition refer
to Tab. 2.
Table 2: Crowd study input data by process level and regulatory text group
Business data
Regulatory text
Lvl 1
Lvl 2
Lvl 3
33% Grp. A
33%
33%
(100%)
Process
process
sub-pr.
tasks
Compl. rel.
Inform. rel.
Grp. B
Grp. C
total
1: Insurance
1
7
31
21
28
49
49
147
2: Banking
1
7
19
24
7
31
31
93
5
Evaluation
The quantitative evaluation of the study is based on accuracy, precision,
and recall.
Precision and recall are “the two most frequent and basic
measures for information retrieval effectiveness [25]. In contrast to most
machine learning evaluations, accuracy is usually not used as a metric for
IR systems as normally over 99.9% of the documents analyzed are irrele-
vant to the query, which would lead to very good accuracy by identifying
all documents as irrelevant [25]. However, our application is also similar
to a text classification and our input data contains only 90% (GPT-4 and
SOTA) and 66% (Crowd-study) irrelevant samples. Thus, like [17] in their
generative AI study we include accuracy in our metrics. To calculate these
metrics, the values True Positive (TP), False Positive (FP), True Negative
(TN), False Negative (FN) are defined as follows: TP = relevant regula-
tory text is identified; FP = relevant regulatory text is not identified; TN
= irrelevant regulatory text is not identified; FN = irrelevant regulatory
text is identified.
5All workers have been asked to read and accept our informed consent document before the
task where we explain to them about such behavioral action logging. Our study has received
Ethics Approval by the review board of the authors’ institutions.
15

Each process level (Fig. 1) is evaluated in order to assess the value of
each step for each method and discuss possible combinational approaches.
For the given business application, it is crucial to identify all relevant
regulatory requirements. If too many are identified by the automated sys-
tem, the following step of a human expert-revision can remove these false
positives but if relevant texts are not retrieved they cannot be considered
in further steps and thus would be left out of process compliance assess-
ments. As [25] states: “various professional searchers such as paralegals
[...] are very concerned with trying to get as high recall as possible, and
will tolerate fairly low precision results in order to get it.” Thus, we aim
for a recall as close to one as possible, accepting low precision values as a
trade-off.
5.1
Expert Analysis
Presenting our approach (cf. Sect. 2) to the domain experts, they confirm
that the study results would aid their compliance assessment work.
For evaluating of the newly proposed methods, we compare their re-
sults with the gold standard retrieved by expert analysis. Thus, we assume
that the expert analysis did not mislabel anything and has therefore an
accuracy, precision, and recall of 1.
5.2
SOTA NLP LIR
Table 3 shows the metrics achieved with the two in Sect. 3.2 introduced
methods. To put the following numbers into perspective, the recall of the
winning team in the (in Sect. 7 mentioned LIR competition) COLIEE
2023 task 1 was 0.41 6.
For use case 1, at process level 1, the BM25 + Cross-Encoder method
(cf. Sect. 3.2) achieves a recall of 0.43. This is slightly higher than the BI-
Encoder + Cross-Encoder method (cf. Sect. 3.2), which scores a recall of
0.41. However, for both levels 2 and 3, the BI-Encoder + Cross-Encoder
performs clearly better than the BM25 alternative with a recall of 0.39
vs. 0.32 (level 2) and 0.35 vs. 0.23 (level 3). As the process relevance
levels change from general to more specific (from level 1 to level 3), the
recall values for both methods decrease. This might imply that as the
relevance levels become more specific, it becomes more challenging for
these methods to retrieve relevant information.
Table 3: SOTA NLP LIR results by process level and method
process level
method
use case 1
use case 2
Acc.
Prec.
Rec.
Acc.
Prec.
Rec.
level 1: process relevance
BM25+CE
0.76
0.19
0.43
0.74
0.11
0.23
BI-E.+CE
0.75
0.18
0.41
0.74
0.13
0.29
level 2: sub-process relevance
BM25+CE
0.95
0.15
0.32
0.94
0.09
0.23
BI-E.+CE
0.95
0.18
0.39
0.94
0.11
0.31
level 3: task/event relevance
BM25+CE
0.97
0.09
0.23
0.97
0.08
0.14
BI-E.+CE
0.97
0.13
0.35
0.97
0.13
0.24
6https://sites.ualberta.ca/~rabelo/COLIEE2023/task1_results.html
16

For use case 2, the BI-Encoder + Cross-Encoder method outperforms
the BM25 + Cross-Encoder at every level.
At level 1, BI-Encoder +
Cross-Encoder achieves a recall of 0.29, while the BM25 + Cross-Encoder
method only reaches 0.23.
As for use case 1, for both methods, a de-
creasing trend in recall can be seen as the process level the relevance is
identified for becomes more specific. In general, the performance for use
case 2 is clearly lower for both methods. This could be an indicator that
the process information provided for use case 2 yields less information.
In both use cases and every process level but use case 1, level 1, the
method BI-Encoder + Cross-Encoder outperforms the BM25 + Cross-
Encoder method in terms of recall. Also, the results for use case 1, level
1 are very close (cf. Tab. 3). Therefore, BI-Encoder + Cross-Encoder
is the recommended method for the SOTA NLP LIR aiming at business
process relevance identification.
5.3
GPT-4
For use case 1, GPT-4 identifies all relevant regulatory texts correctly for
the process (level 1), resulting in a recall of 1. The lower precision shows
that in order to achieve this, multiple false positives have to be accepted.
The results by process level (cf. Tab. 4) show that the more detailed
the relevance Identification (cf. level 2 and 3), the lower the recall as the
differentiation between the aspects of the level becomes less clear. For use
case 2, one relevant regulatory text is identified as false negative, although
by reviewing the text, the reasoning from the generative AI is correct and
the label should in fact be irrelevant. The results for both use cases show
a very high recall on level 1. Comparing the performance of GPT-4 for
the two use cases, a high recall on level 1 can be observed for both use
cases. For level 2, GPT-4 performed better on use case 1, while for level
3 it performed better on use case 2.
Table 4: GPT-4 results by process level
use case 1
use case 2
Acc.
Prec.
Rec.
Acc.
Prec.
Rec.
level 1: process relevance
0.81
0.34
1.00
0.90
0.51
0.97
level 2: sub-process relevance
0.89
0.71
0.81
0.76
0.58
0.62
level 3: task/event relevance
0.75
0.64
0.69
0.82
0.93
0.77
Table 5: Accuracy by type of regulatory text origin for business process level 1
use case 1
use case 2
Group A (business relevant, process relevant)
1.00
0.97
Group B (business relevant, process irrelevant)
0.65
0.79
Group C (business irrelevant, process irrelevant)
0.92
1.00
17

For the analysis by type of regulatory text origin (cf.
Tab.
5) an
evaluation based on precision and recall would not be insightful, as only
group A contains true positive values. The accuracy for Group B is the
lowest, as this is the most ambiguous Group: Group C is quite clearly
irrelevant as the whole document is irrelevant to the business; Group A
is relevant for business and process and the generative AI is very good at
identifying all relevant cases on process level correctly. Group B however
is relevant for the business but not for the specific process. Those cases
are most difficult to classify as it is partly subjective what is e.g., consid-
ered as detailed information relevant to the process or general business
requirement irrelevant to the process.
Concerning the identification of the correct type of relevance (compli-
ance or informative relevance) for the process (level 1), the generative AI
identifies 59% of the relevant text for use case 1 correctly and 80% of the
relevant text for use case 2.
5.4
Crowd Study
We publish the task by the implementation described in Sect. 4.4, target-
ing receiving annotations from 3 different workers who passed our quality
checks. Based on the collected data, we perform 3 evaluations:
• “unfiltered”, showing the average results from all workers;
• “qlt. filter”, by which we consider the first worker submission from
those who passed our quality checks (i.e., attention checks and se-
mantic dependency checks, cf. Sect. 4.4);
• “qlt.
+ comb.”, where we adopt the annotations from all the 3
workers who passed our quality checks and considered a piece of reg.
text as relevant if any of them assigned a relevance label7.
Table 6: Crowd study results by process level and evaluation options
use case 1
use case 2
unfiltered
qlt. filter
qlt. + comb.
qlt. filter
Acc.
Prec.
Rec.
Acc.
Prec.
Rec.
Acc.
Prec.
Rec.
Acc.
Prec.
Rec.
L1
0.77
0.71
0.52
0.83
0.72
0.80
0.71
0.68
0.53
0.86
0.95
0.60
L2
0.89
0.78
0.71
0.94
0.56
0.70
0.85
0.50
0.85
0.92
0.65
0.29
L3
0.61
0.44
0.26
0.62
0.45
0.32
0.62
0.47
0.52
0.53
0.75
0.41
L1: Level 1, process relevance; L2: Level 2, sub-process relevance; L3: Level 3, task/event relevance
The results8 show that the quality checks are a useful addition to add
reliability to crowd study results. The “qlt. + comb.” evaluation delivers
7This increases the number of overall positives (true and false) and decreases the number
of negatives, which favors the overall objective that we would like to maximize the recall and
minimize the omission of relevant text. However, we do not consider “unfiltered + comb.”
as anyone who failed in quality checks but randomly assigned relevance annotations would
eventually make all text be relevant.
8Due to space limit, we show the best performance for Use Case 2.
18

best results on level 2 and 3 but performs poorly on process relevance
(level 1). For use case 1, precision and recall decrease for all options from
level 2 to level 3, as the process information becomes more detailed. For
use case 2, the overall performance of the crowd was lower than in use
case 1. The recall metrics for both use cases and all three levels fail to
come close to the desired 100%, which would mean no relevant text is
mislabeled.
5.5
Comparative results
In the following comparison, we consider the results of SOTA NLP LIR
achieved with the Bi-Encoder+Cross-Encoder method, as this delivers
overall better results than BM25+Cross-Encoder. Similarly, for the crowd
study the results received with the “qlt. filter” setting are considered in
the following. Compared to the gold standard created by expert analysis,
none of the other three methods achieves recall results over all three pro-
cess levels and for both use cases that would allow this method to replace
the expert analysis but this was already expected and anticipated. GPT-4
performs best and achieves a recall of 1 for level 1 in use case 1 and 0.97
for use case 2, which is nearly perfect. Both, Crowd study with recall
values of 0.8 and 0.6, as well as the SOTA NLP LIR with 0.41 and 0.29,
show worse results. This is similar to sub-process relevance (level 2) and
task/event relevance (level 3). For level 2, GPT-4 achieves recall values
of 0.81 and 0.62, the Crowd achieves 0.7 and 0.29, while SOTA NLP LIR
only reaches 0.39 and 0.31.
Finally, for level 3, GPT-4 achieves recall
values of 0.69 and 0.77, the Crowd achieves 0.32 and 0.41, while SOTA
NLP LIR only reaches 0.35 and 0.24.
For SOTA NLP LIR, GPT-4, and the Crowd, study, the results for use
case 1 are overall better than use case 2, and there is a clear tendency that
the more detailed the level, the less reliable the relevance judgment. For
use case 1, the 3 methods perform best for process level and the results
decrease with the level of detail. For use case 2 there are a few exceptions
to this as the SOTA NLP LIR method has difficulty with process level 1,
while GPT-4 and Crowd workers perform better on level 3 than level 2.
As described in Sect. 3 a generative AI like GPT-4 is able to take a
lot of context information as input and also has the capabilities to con-
sider these for the relevance judgment. This seems to be advantageous in
complex business settings as displayed by the two use cases of this study.
Crowd workers on the other hand aim to fulfill their task as quickly as
possible and thus have limited motivation to consider a large amount of
context information.
The information for Crowd workers needs to be
presented in a well-prepared, condensed manner. The SOTA NLP LIR
method was designed similarly to best-performing methods for Legal In-
formation Retrieval tasks. However, those tasks do not have to consider
a complex business context for their retrieval. Being based on a simple
prompt of the corresponding process level description, the implemented
SOTA NLP LIR approach lacks the inclusion of the wider business con-
text, which seems to cause its poorer performance compared to the other
approaches.
Consequently, if the methods are reviewed individually and ranked
19

purely based on their recall results, the expert analysis with its recall of 1
performs best, followed by GPT-4 with recall values between 0.62–1.0, de-
pending on the use case and process level (1-3). The Crowd workers would
place 3rd place with recall values between 0.29–0.8, and the SOTA NLP
LIR with recall values between 0.24–0.41 would be least favorable. How-
ever, as introduced in Sect. 2.2, there are other aspects to be considered
for a holistic analysis which will be discussed in Sect.6.
6
Discussion
This section discusses the implications of the comparative study regard-
ing applicability, automation, transparency, and reproducibility as well as
limitations of the study overall.
6.1
Implications
Figure 2 puts the four methods into context of the two dimensions of au-
tomation and transparency/ reproducibility which might be key success
factors for the application of a particular method. The analyzed methods
display extreme cases along the inspected aspects of automation, trans-
parency, and reproducibility (cf. Sect. 2.2). Concerning the applicabil-
ity, combinations and intermediate stages between the four investigated
methods are conceivable. For example, LLM can be custom-trained and
business internal.
The SOTA NLP approach can also be improved by
custom-trained machine-learning approaches for a specific application. If
either of these automated methods is combined with the expert analysis,
e.g., for an automated pre-selection for the experts, it could decrease the
manual workload for reference identification immensely.
In the following, we evaluate the results from all four methods in com-
parison and with regard to possible applicability as human-expert aid.
Table 7 suggests recommended method combinations for selected process
scenarios based on characteristics describing the process scenario at hand
and specified in each column. The recommendations are based on balanc-
ing the need for adaptability, regulatory compliance, and expert oversight.
Process usage indicates the frequency or extent to which a business pro-
cess is utilized, e.g., a core process that is executed every hour or minute
or a rarely needed process. Process usage constitutes a measurement of
the amount of data available about the process (e.g., for custom training
or fine-tuning an AI model) and also gives an indication of the process
complexity, as more frequently used processes tend to have more varia-
tions and optional tasks. The process impact highlights the importance
of a high recall in the relevance judgment to prohibit high fines for com-
pliance breaches or loss of good reputation.
The actions of a process,
for example, could have high-value customer impact or be purely internal
with low impact. Process and regulatory dynamics reflect how fre-
quently a process or its associated regulations change, while regulatory
input measures the number of regulatory documents that need to be con-
sidered for the relevance judgment. Both characteristics indicate the need
20

for automation as the amount and frequency of manual work would be
high otherwise.
Table 7: Selected process scenarios with recommended method combinations
process
usage
process
impact
process and
regulatory
dynamics
regulatory
input
recommended
method
combi-
nation
low-high
high
low
low
expert analysis
high
high
high
high
SOTA NLP LIR + exp.
analysis
high
low
high
high
GPT-4 + exp. analysis
low-high
low
low
low
Crowd + exp. analysis
In case of a business process with a high impact that has a low change
rate both on the process and regulatory side and a low number of regu-
latory documents to consider, the best approach is the expert analysis.
The high impact of the process demands a solution with high transparency
and reproducibility. At the same time, the low dynamics and regulatory
input allow for a purely manual solution.
If the impact of the process is high and, at the same time, the dy-
namics and regulatory input are also too high to be handled purely man-
ually, SOTA NLP LIR + expert analysis is recommended.
This
semi-automated combination delivers the transparency needed for a high-
impact process while supporting the manual work by experts with an au-
tomated pre-selection. As the SOTA NLP LIR results based on standard
encoders are not satisfactory, our recommendation for industry applica-
tion would be to custom train or fine-tune models to further refine the
SOTA NLP LIR method for a specific business application.
GPT-4 + expert analysis is the method of choice if the process
is frequently used, a high number of regulatory documents needs to be
considered and these, as well as the process, are highly dynamic. When
at the same time the process impact is low, this allows for less transparent
automation support. Across the three levels and both use cases, GPT-4
delivers the highest recalls and overall best results for relevance identifica-
tion, compared to the gold standard (expert analysis). The generative AI
shows reliable results on the process (level 1) and can thus be a real aid to
experts for relevance judgments. GPT-4 can be applied to pre-select the
vast amount of regulatory text in the described scenario. The human ex-
perts can then review the results identified as relevant in order to remove
false positives. For process level 2-3 the relevance identifications of GPT-4
are not to be trusted by themselves as false negatives occur. Overall, the
results demonstrate the potential to be used as insightful reasoning to aid
the experts in their final relevance judgment. Further improvements to
the results could be achieved by fine-tuning an LLM to a given business
and process setting.
The Crowd + expert analysis method is only recommended in a
special scenario. As it is unknown how crowd workers come to their rel-
evance judgments, their results are, similar to the output from GPT-4,
not transparent. Hence, crowd workers should only be consulted in low-
21

impact processes, but their results are anyway outperformed by GPT-4.
Additionally, due to the nature of a crowd study (cf. Sect. 3.4) as well as
the length and complexity of the regulatory and business process informa-
tion involved in making the relevance judgment, the crowd workers seem
not suitable for large amounts of regulatory input or a dynamic setting.
Therefore, we recommend utilizing crowd studies for indications which
process(-levels) are not clearly defined.
For example, when 0 out of 3
crowd workers identify a process(-step) as relevant, although it actually is
relevant, this indicates unclear process elements and is a valuable insight
for the process modeling. Consequently, business processes need to be
well defined and documented in order to perform reliable relevance iden-
tifications on them. Crowd workers could be a valuable aid for experts in
identifying ill-defined processes and improve these, especially for scenarios
with low regulatory input and change.
6.2
Limitations
In the following, we discuss selected limitations of the presented study.
Ambiguity between labels “compliance – informative” and “in-
formative – irrelevant” and general applicability of some regu-
latory texts: False positive regulatory texts are often identified as infor-
mative relevant, mainly for texts from group B which are relevant for the
business in general, but either considered to belong to another process or
as too broad to be related to the specific process. Some of these cases
could be managed, e.g., by a rule that excludes all regulatory texts from
being process-relevant if GPT-4 identifies them as relevant for 3 or more
sub-processes.
The differentiation between what is business or process
relevant is challenging, as well, even for academic staff without knowing
the entire business process landscape or consulting with domain experts.
Distinguishing the relevance for a given process from other, re-
lated processes in the business: For use case 1, the domain experts
shared, that there are separate processes with detailed procedures con-
cerning e.g. “quality assurance” or “handling of complaints”. However,
as quality and complaints are also mentioned tasks of use case 1, the
2 methods falsely label texts as relevant for those tasks. All text from
the Privacy Principle regulatory document, for example, are labeled as
relevant by GPT-4 for the use case 1 process.
This is understandable
as privacy principles certainly are important in every process concerned
with customer or third-party data, but it is not the concern of the travel
insurance claims process to ensure privacy principles. It is relevant for the
business (level 0) and for a data security and privacy process the business
hopefully has in place but it is not relevant for the process use case 1 as
defined by the business domain experts.
Standalone ability of extracted regulatory texts: Legal texts often
include references to other sections and paragraphs within the same doc-
ument and across documents. As our study is designed to evaluate the
relevance of each text paragraph, independently of each other, information
exploiting references is currently not accessed, neither by GPT-4 nor the
crowd workers although it might provide additional aid in the relevance
22

assessment.
Missing context consideration: In most cases, the studied methods
consider the context of regulatory text and business process. However,
there are cases where the provided metadata gives a clear indication of
the relevance but is not included in the judgment.
Data Privacy issues for closed-access documents: Both GPT-4 and
crowdsourcing pose challenges in handling secret (e.g. business internal
requirements) or payable (e.g. ISO-Norm) documents. For the generative
AI, it is possible to opt for excluding the submitted data for training
the model. Additionally, the GPT-4 provider plans to offer a Business
subscription in the future.
Cost: No closer consideration of the cost for the 2 methods in relation to
the time saved for experts solving the task without aid was performed.
Two further aspects are selected limitations of the general problem space.
Subjectivity and level of detail in business process models: Typi-
cally, different modelers will create different variants of a model. We made
the same experience when working with the insurance domain experts to
create the model for use case 1 which took several iterations. Moreover, a
process model, in particular, at a conceptual level, provides an abstraction
of reality. We already worked with three levels of detail, but still details
on, for example, the task design are not covered, cf. [30] for a more de-
tailed analysis of this challenge. This leads to uncertainty about whether
a regulatory text is relevant or not as it might not be relevant depending
on the abstraction levels of text and process model.
Comparability between process and regulatory information: The
challenge of ontological alignment between the business and regulatory
texts has been observed in previous studies [40]. Examples include dif-
ferences in active vs. passive style, level of detail, or length of sentences.
Challenging alignments might be also caused by different perspectives,
e.g. a regulations being written from the customer perspective, while the
process is phrased from the businesses perspective.
7
Related Work
”[Business process] compliance is a relationship between two sets of
specifications: the specifications for executing a business process and the
specifications regulating a business.” [14, 40, 14] describe that business
processes and business obligations (including laws, regulations) are de-
signed and handled independently of each other and that business process
compliance is a complex problem, due to the ”scale and diversity of com-
pliance requirements and additionally the fact that these requirements
may frequently change” [40]. Additionally, the majority of existing busi-
ness process compliance approaches are based on formalized constraints
[40, 13, 15].
[9, 42, 49, 50] extract machine-readable compliance requirements from
legal natural language text, [28] compares process descriptions with model-
based process descriptions, [45] is concerned with the interpretation im-
23

provement of textual process descriptions, and [51] assess compliance of
process models with regulatory documents. [31] defines requirements for
business process compliance monitoring. Their approach starts with Com-
pliance Requirements (in form of e.g. laws or regulations) which first need
to be interpreted into compliance objectives and then specified into com-
pliance rules. How the Compliance Requirements, meaning the relevant
laws, regulations, etc. are identified is not covered. Thus, all of the above
mentioned approaches take relevance as an implicit assumption.
While legal information retrieval (LIR) identifies relevant data
based on a large corpus of legal data, we study relevance based on business
process data. Information retrieval is based on similarity computation,
using e.g., BERT-Variations [43] between the search term and the text
corpus [25]. A search term usually consists of a few keywords, rather than
a long, complex prompt as in our case. Current research [33, 23, 43, 37]
in the field of regulatory document ranking and retrieval show, that a
“combination of lexical and semantic retrieval models leads to the best
results” [1]. Major research in this area originates form the Competition
on Legal Information Extraction/Entailment (COLIEE) [22]. The tasks
about relevant text retrieval are related to our problem. However, the fact,
that there are different tasks for case and statute law already indicates how
different the approaches are even when retrieving relevant law texts based
on other relevant law texts of the same type. Another very recent work
is concerned with classifying regulatory documents as business-relevant
or business-irrelevant [8]. Our approach focuses on the identification of
the relevant processes within the business and even more detailed, which
process parts are affected. In summary, no LIR analysis exists to identify
relevant requirements for a specific business process or even more specific
task of a business process as presented in this work.
Our application area of generative AI falls into the field of text
classification, as we want to classify a regulatory text as relevant or ir-
relevant, given a process scenario and context information. The litera-
ture reviews on large language models and their capabilities conducted
by [29] come to the conclusion that “ChatGPT has tremendous poten-
tial in text classification tasks”. [17] studies the classification capabili-
ties of ChatGPT with crowd workers for identifying implicit hate speech
in tweets. They conclude that ChatGPT can aid the understanding of
the experts and provides “great potential of ChatGPT as a data anno-
tation tool” [17]. As of October 2023, the latest GPT (Generative Pre-
trained Transformer) version is GPT-4. OpenAI introduces their model
with the promise of “human-level performance on various professional
and academic benchmarks” [35], including applicability to the legal do-
main through e.g. “passing a simulated bar exam” [35]. Therefore, as
applicability to classification tasks and the legal domain has been shown,
but no combination of legal data classification, depending on complex pro-
cess and context data has been performed yet, we choose GPT-4 as one
method for this study.
Over the years, crowdsourcing has provided great opportunities to
create large-scale manually labeled ground-truth data to harness the “wis-
dom of crowds” for various applications (e.g., training machine learning
models) [24, 6]. On paid crowdsourcing platforms such as Amazon MTurk
24

(AMT), crowd workers usually complete tasks anonymously, and, hence,
collecting high-quality data becomes a major challenge. Existing research
has explored different ways to guarantee the quality of the collected data,
such as answer aggregation models [46, 18], suitable workers selection
[3, 7, 19], embedding purpose-designed questions (e.g., gold standard)
[34, 36], and encouraging workers to re-think about the questions [32].
Following this line of research, in our crowd study, we adopt three qual-
ity checks in the deployed task, including: (1) test questions to check if
the worker has understood the task, (2) attention checks to filter those
who provide random answers, and (3) sophisticated task design where
only certain combinations of the answers make sense according to [21]
(implementation details are described in Sect. 4.4). On the other hand,
[5] and [48] show that a combination of automated methods with input
from crowd workers can improve the quality of the generated annotations.
Therefore, we also consider combining algorithmic approaches with crowd-
sourcing to design our process for annotating a large amount of regulatory
documents, for which the first step is to understand, to what extent, such
a complex task could be completed by AI, experts and crowds.
8
Conclusion
This paper studies how legal and domain experts can be supported by
generative AI, embedding-based ranking, and crowdsourcing approaches
when assessing the relevance of regulatory documents for business pro-
cesses, i.e., their business context, their process context, and their tasks.
This assessment is challenging due to the volume and variety of regula-
tory documents. In order to tackle these challenges, the study provides
recommendations of method combinations for selected process scenarios
with different characteristics, i.e., usage, impact, dynamics, and regula-
tory input, allowing for and enabling different levels of automation and
transparency/reproducibility. Scenarios with high usage, impact, dynam-
ics, and regulatory input, for example, demand for automation to handle
the volume of input data and high transparency at the same time. Here a
combination of embedding-based ranking and expert analysis is advisable.
Generative AI can be a great human-aid in relevancy identification, espe-
cially on process level and also give indications and consideration ideas for
the relevance judgment of the more detailed aspects of a process. However,
due to its limitations in terms of transparency and reproducibility, we only
recommend its usage in certain scenarios. Under certain circumstances,
e.g., if the focus is more on the transparency of the support method or
the goal is more towards improving the process documentation for the au-
tomated methods, embedding-based ranking and crowdsourcing can also
be valuable assets to the relevance judgment for business processes. Such
a semi-automated approach relieves the burden on experts and overall
contributes to improving business process explainability, traceability, and
the compliance of processes with textual requirements.
The presented study can be extended in several ways. With respect
to pre-processing, the presented approach does not include the search and
scraping for relevant regulatory documents for a given business process,
25

e.g., on the web or in closed-access ISO-Norms.
This extension would
allow for a holistic automated pre-selection of all regulatory requirements
for a process that then needs to be evaluated for relevancy. Regarding the
processing of the documents, in future work, one could further investigate
how concepts from Legal Information Retrieval could be adjusted to deal
with the given business application and compare the results of those lex-
ical and semantical systems with the methods investigated in this study.
As generative AI methods seem very sensitive to the prompt design and
phrasing [20], multiple prompt runs with, e.g., para-phrases could be con-
sidered in the future. Finally, the inclusion of a confidence score in the
responses (of both methods) could further aid the usability of the results
during post-processing. The identified matches between regulatory texts
and business process could be integrated and visualized within BPMN
models, as prior studies [47] that analyzed stakeholders preferred repre-
sentation of rules referring to business processes, found that rules linked
to BPMN models show the best results.
