Extending Source Code Pre-Trained Language
Models to Summarise Decompiled Binaries
Ali Al-Kaswan
Delft University of Technology
Delft, The Netherlands

Touﬁque Ahmed
University of California, Davis
Davis, California, USA

Maliheh Izadi
Delft University of Technology
Delft, The Netherlands

Anand Ashok Sawant
University of California, Davis
Davis, California, USA

Premkumar Devanbu
University of California, Davis
Davis, California, USA

Arie van Deursen
Delft University of Technology
Delft, The Netherlands

Abstract—Binary reverse engineering is used to understand
and analyse programs for which the source code is unavailable.
Decompilers can help, transforming opaque binaries into a
more readable source code-like representation. Still, reverse
engineering is difﬁcult and costly, involving considering effort
in labelling code with helpful summaries. While the automated
summarisation of decompiled code can help reverse engineers
understand and analyse binaries, current work mainly focuses on
summarising source code, and no suitable dataset exists for this
task. In this work, we extend large pre-trained language models of
source code to summarise de-compiled binary functions. Further-
more, we investigate the impact of input and data properties on the
performance of such models. Our approach consists of two main
components; the data and the model. We ﬁrst build CAPYBARA,
a dataset of 214K decompiled function-documentation pairs
across various compiler optimisations. We extend CAPYBARA
further by removing identiﬁers, and deduplicating the data.
Next, we ﬁne-tune the CodeT5 base model with CAPYBARA to
create BinT5. BinT5 achieves the state-of-the-art BLEU-4 score
of 60.83, 58.82 and, 44.21 for summarising source, decompiled,
and obfuscated decompiled code, respectively. This indicates that
these models can be extended to decompiled binaries successfully.
Finally, we found that the performance of BinT5 is not heavily
dependent on the dataset size and compiler optimisation level.
We recommend future research to further investigate transferring
knowledge when working with less expressive input formats such
as stripped binaries.
Index Terms—Decompilation, Binary, Reverse Engineering,
Summarization, Deep Learning, Pre-trained Language Models,
CodeT5, Transformers
I. INTRODUCTION
Reverse engineering binary programs has many applica-
tions, in particular, software security [1]. Binary reverse
engineering is a hard task, requiring highly skilled reverse
engineers [1, 2]. Disassemblers and decompilers can help
in this process. Disassemblers transform the binary into a
low-level intermediate representation, and decompilers lift
the representation to a high-level programming language-like
representation. But the output of decompilers is still difﬁcult
to read and understand [1, 3]. Much of the work that goes
into reverse engineering a binary is spent labelling functions
with semantic descriptions [1]. Current approaches [4–10]
mainly focus on recovering aspects lost in the compilation
and decompilation process, such as names and types. Existing
works fail to address the inherent difﬁculties in binary code
comprehensibility, namely, the need for a high-level overview
of the code.
For source code, methods exist to automatically generate
summaries from code [11, 12]. Source code summarisation
is used to automatically generate short natural language de-
scriptions of code, which support program comprehension
and aid maintenance [12, 13]. While these methods have
been successfully applied to programming languages such as
Python, Java and PHP [14–16], using pre-trained language
models [14–16], none of these methods has been applied to
the relatively syntactically-poor output of decompilers (see
Figures
1a and
1b). Being able to quickly determine the
context and application of a function, can save valuable
analysis time, and greatly beneﬁt reverse engineers. Function
and variable names alone, are inadequate representations of the
source code [12], which is why having descriptive summaries
of binaries is desirable.
Following [17], source code can be described as having
two information channels: the algorithmic channel and the
natural language channel. The algorithmic channel speciﬁes
the execution of a program (semantics), while the natural
language channel explains the purpose and context of the
program to humans [17]. The natural channel includes function
and variable names, code comments and the speciﬁc human-
readable structure of programs. Processors only consider the
algorithmic channel to execute a program, while humans use
both the algorithmic channel and the natural channel to under-
stand a piece of code [17]. Furthermore, code is very regular
and predictable, even more so than natural languages [18].
The compilation process, which transforms readable code
into executable binaries, removes much of the information
contained in the natural channel. Especially stripped binaries
— binaries of which the symbol table is removed — are
challenging, since they have almost no identiﬁers at all as
arXiv:2301.01701v2  [cs.CR]  13 Jan 2023

can be observed in Figure 1c.
The goal of this paper is to advance the ﬁeld of binary
reverse engineering by exploring the application of code
summarisation to decompiled binaries by taking advantage of
source code pre-trained language models.
However, there exists no dataset of aligned binaries and
source code summaries since this is a new and unexplored
task. As pointed out by LeClair and McMillan, the lack of
standardised datasets is a major barrier to ongoing research,
which we will address for this task [19]. In this paper, we
create a dataset containing pairs of decompiled and stripped-
decompiled functions and summaries of these functions. Dur-
ing the creation of this dataset, we conform to the current best
practices for dataset construction [19, 20].
We apply this dataset to an existing pre-trained language
model using transfer learning, by ﬁne-tuning this pre-trained
model on our dataset. For this task, we selected a pre-trained
CodeT5 model, which was only trained on source code [14].
We perform experiments on this model to explore the
impact of decompilation, and the importance of identiﬁers.
Furthermore, we explore the impact of compiler optimisation
levels, the dataset size and the level of duplication.
Our ﬁndings are that the decompilation and alignment
of stripped functions has a very high failure rate; and the
resulting stripped model has low performance. But, we found
that the model shows state-of-the-art performance with both
decompiled code as well as demi-stripped stripped code, code
of which the identiﬁers were removed after decompilation. Our
experiments on data duplication and dataset size further show
that these models can be trained with few data, and that while
duplicates have a high impact on performance, their presence
is not paramount to model performance.
Our key result: language models pre-trained on source code
can be ﬁne-tuned on binaries, opening up a range of new
possibilities for the automated analysis of binaries.
To summarise, the main contributions of this paper are:
• CAPYBARA1, a dataset of Combined Aligned de-
comPiled BinarY code And Related Annotations. A novel
dataset of aligned, C, decompiled, stripped-decompiled
and demi-stripped summary pairs2 (Section III);
• BinT53, a Binary summarisation CodeT5 model, a simple
and straightforward adaptation of a source code trained
code summarisation model to decompiled code using
CAPYBARA (Section IV);
• An empirical investigation on the impact of the properties
of decompiled code and the properties of CAPYBARA
(Sections V and VI);
The materials, including the processed and raw data, the
trained model checkpoints and steps to replicate our exper-
iments, are openly available in our replication package4.
1CAPYBARA: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7229809
2Decompiled code with strip-like obfuscation applied
3BinT5: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7229913
4Replication package: https://github.com/AISE-TUDelft/Capybara-BinT5
II. BACKGROUND
In this section, we introduce the background of compilers,
binary reverse engineering, transfer learning and the code
summarisation task.
A. Compilers and Optimisation Levels
Compilers are programs that convert source code from one
programming language to another, but generally, and in the
context of this work, the term is used to refer to programs
that translate high-level code, like C, to a lower-level language
such as machine code or bytecode. For our work, we focus
on the GNU Compiler Collection (GCC)5 and Clang/LLVM
(Clang)6.
Compilers feature optimisation levels. Generally, the goal
of optimisations is the improvement of runtime performance
or program size at the expense of compilation time and the
ability to debug [21].
By default, if GCC is invoked without any optimisation
options, the program will be compiled with -O0. -O1, -O2
and -O3 incrementally apply more optimisation to the binary
at the expense of a higher compilation time [22]. Optimisations
can restructure and transform the program in relation to the
source code, by changing the control ﬂow or the data of the
program [23]. This obfuscation can complicate the reverse
engineering process by reducing the accuracy of tools [23].
B. Ghidra
Ghidra7 is a free and open-source reverse engineering
toolkit developed by the US National Security Agency. Ghidra
contains many separate analysis modules that allow a reverse
engineer to analyse binaries. Ghidra features a disassembler,
which assembles binaries back into an intermediate represen-
tation. In the case of x86-x64 binaries like the binaries this
work focuses on, the intermediate representation will be the
Assembly language. The decompiler, on the other hand, is a
processor language-agnostic transformation engine that takes
the disassembled code and creates a source code representa-
tion, namely pseudo-C. Pseudo-C follows the general language
conventions of C, but it cannot be compiled.
Observe the relatively simple rtp sess ssrc function from
creytiv/re8 shown in Figure 1a. We compile the project using
the -O3 compiler level as deﬁned in the project. We decompile
the binaries using Ghidra’s decompiler using the standard
conﬁguration, the resulting pseudo-code is shown in Figure 1b.
We observe that aside from the function name, almost the
entire natural channel has been destroyed by the compilation
and decompilation process. The parameter and variable names
are gone, any documentation is removed and the relatively
simple logic has been unrolled to a much more difﬁcult-
to-understand representation. Ghidra also incorrectly labelled
many of the variable types and failed to identify the struct
datatype.
5GCC: https://gcc.gnu.org/
6Clang: https://clang.llvm.org/
7Ghidra: https://ghidra-sre.org/
8re: https://github.com/creytiv/re
2

/**
* Get the Synchronizing source for an RTP/RTCP
Socket
,→

*/
uint32_t rtp_sess_ssrc(const struct rtp_sock *rs){
return rs ? rs -> enc.ssrc : 0;}
(a) Source rtp sess ssrc function
ulong rtp_sess_ssrc(long param_1){
uint local_14 ;
if (param_1 == 0){
local_14 = 0;
} else {
local_14 = * (uint *) (param_1 + 4);}
return (ulong) local_14;
}
(b) Decompiled rtp sess ssrc function
ulong FUN_00100d30 ( long param_1 ){
uint local_14 ;
if (param_1 == 0) {
local_14 = 0 ;
} else {
local_14 = * (uint *) (param_1 + 4);}
return ( ulong ) local_14 ;}
(c) Stripped decompiled rtp sess ssrc function
Fig. 1: Example source, decompiled and stripped code snippet
Using our trained BinT5 model we can summarise the
decompiled code and generate the following summary: Get
the source for an RTP/RTCP Socket. This summary gives us
an indication of the purpose of the function. Integrating this
generated summary into Ghidra increases the readability of
the entire binary. Keep in mind that a reverse engineer has
to understand not just this function, but hundreds of different
functions in a single binary.
C. Stripping
Aside from compiling with higher optimisation levels, bi-
naries can also be stripped to obfuscate the underlying code
and to resist analysis [24]. Commercial off-the-shelf software
is often stripped to reduce the memory and storage footprint
of the binaries, and to resist analysis to protect the intellectual
property of the creator. Many vulnerable and malicious bina-
ries are, unfortunately, also stripped to resist security analysis
and hide their faults [5].
Unix and Unix-like operating systems include a strip utility.
The strip utility removes any operands that are not nec-
essary for the execution of the binary while ensuring that
the execution of the binary remains unchanged. The exact
implementation and what constitutes unnecessary operands are
left to the implementor.9 The strip utility as implemented in
9strip: https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/7908799/xcu/strip.html
GNU/Linux removes the symbol table from the binary. The
symbol table contains each symbol’s location, type and name.
Like higher optimisation levels, the use of stripping can
greatly complicate the efforts to reverse engineer a binary,
as well as reduce the accuracy and effectiveness of reverse
engineering tools [24].
For example, we compile, strip and decompile the function
in Figure 1a, and the resulting stripped decompiled function
is shown in Figure 1c. In addition to the details lost by the
decompilation process, the stripper removed all symbols, like
the function names.
D. Code Summarisation Task:
Code summarisation (also referred to as source code sum-
marisation) is the task of writing short descriptions from
source code, usually a single-sentence summary of the source
code. The main use is for software documentation, like the
one-sentence JavaDoc description used in Java [19]. This
documentation is important for program comprehension and
maintenance. But the process of writing and maintaining
these descriptions is a labour-intensive and time-consuming
task, which is where the beneﬁts of automating that process
arise. Automatic code summarisation is an active and popular
research problem in the ﬁeld of software engineering [19].
E. Transformer-based Models
Transformers were originally proposed by Vaswani et al.
as a sequence-to-sequence architecture [25]. Unlike the Re-
current Neural Networks [26] (RNN), the Long Short-Term
Memory [27] (LSTM) variant of RNNs [26] and Convolutional
Neural Networks [28] (CNN), Transformers only use a mecha-
nism called self-attention to capture dependencies between the
input and output. The current state-of-the-art NLP models for
programming languages such as CodeT5 [14], CodeBERT [15]
and PolyGlotCodeBERT [16] are all based on the Transformer
architecture [25].
F. Transfer Learning
Pre-trained Transformers-based language models, such as
RoBERTa [29], CodeBERT [15] and CodeT5 [14] utilise
a pre-train then ﬁne-tune paradigm. The bespoke paradigm
was initially introduced by Kenton and Toutanova. In this
paradigm, the models are ﬁrst trained in an unsupervised
manner on a large unlabelled dataset. These pre-trained models
can then be ﬁne-tuned to perform a more specialised task,
such as summarisation. Transfer learning uses the knowledge
that is obtained in one task to solve a different task. It
allows the creation of general models that are trained once
on massive datasets. These general models, which contain
general domain knowledge can then be ﬁne-tuned for a speciﬁc
downstream task. This approach is quicker and requires less
training data than training a model on the downstream task
from scratch [30].
3

Source 
Code
Compilation
Decompilation
Decompiled
</>
Stripping
Decompilation
Function 
Extraction
</>
Comment 
Alignment
Comment 
Alignment
Stripped
Comment 
Extraction
Demi-Stripped
Comment 
Alignment
Demi
Stripping
Fig. 2: Data Collection Pipeline
III. CAPYBARA DATASET
We require a dataset of decompiled functions labelled with
a descriptive summary to create and assess our solution. This
dataset should be relatively large to suit the ‘data-hungry’
nature of deep-learning models. Furthermore, the dataset needs
to feature a diverse set of data representative of our solution’s
actual real-life use case.
A. Data Collection
To create such a large and diverse dataset we made use
of BinSwarm [7], an existing dataset of aligned decompiled
and stripped decompiled functions10. BinSwarm collects C-
based projects from Github. The projects are ﬁltered to only
include those that are actively being developed, using Travis
CI and built for Ubuntu Linux. The projects are built using
Docker. The resulting binaries are then copied and stripped,
and both the stripped and unstripped binaries are decompiled
using Ghidra. The functions are extracted from the stripped
and unstripped decompiled code and aligned with the source
code. The BinSwarm dataset only contains aligned tuples of
source code and (stripped-) decompiled functions. We extract
documentation from the original source code ﬁles to add
descriptive comments to this dataset. To that end, we depend
on the documentation included in the source code by the
original authors in the form of single and multiline comments.
We locate the functions in the unbuilt project ﬁles and align the
decompiled functions with the comments in the source code
using srcML11 to extract any documentation located directly
before a function signature. A high-level overview of the entire
process is shown in Figure 2.
A function’s documentation often also contains other details
besides the descriptive summary. We found that C projects
do not follow a single documentation standard. For example,
Javadoc for Java has a short one-line description or summary
for each method at the beginning of the multiline comment
10BinSwarm: https://hub.docker.com/r/binswarm/cbuilds
11srcML: https://www.srcml.org/

Clock Output
,→
* Exact sources available depend on your target.
* On devices with multiple MCO pins, this function
controls MCO1
,→

*/
Fig. 3: Example of documentation from jeanthom/ DirtyJTAG:
rcc set mco
block. In C, there is no singular documentation standard, so
there might not be a single-line summary, and we will need
to locate it in the comment block automatically.
a) Summary Extraction Rules: We observe that the ma-
jority of single-line data are descriptive summaries, so we
extract the ﬁrst sentence. We identify many documentation
styles in our multi-line data, we deﬁne some automated rules
to extract summaries from the documentation:

after the tag. The ‘brief‘ tag is part of the Doxygen docu-
mentation standard12, an example is shown in Figure 313.
• Description: If the documentation contains a line with
‘Description:‘, we extract the following sentence.

before the tag. We extract that sentence.
b) Filtering Rules: To improve the quality of the dataset
we ﬁlter out samples based on the rules used by the Code-
SearchNet dataset [20] included in the CodeXGlue benchmark
for the summarisation task [31]:
• Documentation length: We remove any summaries that
are too long or too short and remove anything shorter
than 3 or longer than 256 tokens.
• Special tokens: We follow the example of the Code-
SearchNet [20] and remove all documentation that con-
tains special tokens. We scan for web tokens (like
‘http://’), HTML tokens (like ‘<head>’), paths (like
‘C://Users/..’), since this documentation usually refers to
external resources. We additionally ﬁlter any developer
tokens (like ‘FIXME:’), as these documents do not pro-
vide meaningful information about the function itself, but
contain comments about the development process.
• Language: We ﬁlter out any documentation that was not
written in English using the FastText language identiﬁca-
tion algorithm [32]. Around 92.19% of the documentation
is in English.
• Empty documentation: We ﬁnd that a large number of
functions did not have any documentation associated with
them at all. We simply remove these samples from the
dataset.
12Doxygen:https://doxygen.nl/manual/docblocks.html
13jeanthom/DirtyJTAG:rcc set mco:https://gitlab.com/
insane-adding-machines/unicore-mx/-/blob/master/lib/stm32/common/
rcc common all.c#L192
4

• Abstract Syntax Tree: The authors of the CodeSearch-
Net dataset [20] additionally, remove any samples that do
not parse into an AST. We choose to omit this step since
all of our samples have been successfully compiled and
have thus at one point been parsed into an AST by the
compiler.
B. Dataset Preparation
a) Synthesis of Demi-stripped Code: From the dataset
of decompiled functions, we also create another dataset. We
emulate the process of stripping by removing all the iden-
tiﬁers from the decompiled code and replacing them with
placeholders. For clarity, we call this demi-stripped data. Like
the stripped dataset, the identiﬁers are all removed, but this is
only done after the decompilation process. The decompiler still
had access to the identiﬁers and could use the symbol table
during decompilation. Most importantly, this demi-stripped
dataset still has the same structure and control ﬂow as the
unstripped decompiled dataset and avoids any decompilation
issues arising from stripping.
b) Data Split: The dataset is split into a train, test and
validation set. These sets constitute approximately, 80%, 10%
and 10%
[19] of the complete dataset. As recommended
by Shi et al. and LeClair and McMillan, we prevent leakage
of vocabulary and code patterns between the sets, by sampling
the sets in a cross-project manner [13, 19]. This means that an
entire project gets assigned to one of the sets, and functions
from the same project cannot be assigned to different sets. The
projects in the test and validation set are the same across all
datasets.
c) Duplication: Large corpora of code, like the cor-
pus gathered by BinSwarm, tend to have a high degree
of duplication [19]. As a result, snippets of code that are
relatively unchanged appear in multiple parts of the corpus.
This can be in the form of copied, generic or auto-generated
functions. These functions will appear in multiple repositories
and might be duplicated across the training and testing data.
Besides exact duplicates, near-duplicates can also occur. Near-
duplicates differ in a few minor aspects like additional code
comments or different function names. While removing exact
duplicates is relatively fast and straightforward, removing
near-duplicates is much more challenging and computationally
intensive [33]. The issue with code duplication in classical
code summarisation is that the models and tools are supposed
to be used to generate summaries for new and unseen code.
The evaluation metrics should therefore measure the gener-
alisation of the tool on new samples [33]. Duplicates and
near-duplicates are not deﬁned as new samples. A user of
such a tool could simply look these samples up. Furthermore,
large, high-capacity models like CodeT5 with 220M [14] or
CodeBERT with 128M [15] parameters, have a large capacity
to memorise duplicated code [33].
However, the use case outlined in this work is more akin
to deobfuscation. As explained by Allamanis, deobfuscation
could be a use case where duplicates are valid and part of the
true distribution of the problem [33]. Compiled code contains
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Token count
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0.005
Density
Source code
Decompiled code
Fig. 4: Tokens in source C and decompiled code
a lot of duplicate code, and understanding this code is still
difﬁcult and essential for understanding the binary. While
regular source code allows the reader to look up code snippets,
decompiled binaries have an additional obfuscation applied.
We, therefore, focus on the model’s performance on code
with duplicates as we believe duplicates to be part of the true
distribution of the data, but we also report the deduplicated
results.
C. Dataset Properties
Table I shows the size of the processed dataset. Of the 2.1M
aligned decompiled functions, we extract documentation for
215k of them, and we found that the majority of samples, 1.5M
did not have any documentation at all. Furthermore, BinSwarm
only provided us with 415k aligned stripped samples, and we
can extract documentation for only 14k of these samples.
Dataset
Including duplicates
Deduplicated
C/Demi/Decom
214,587
79,673
Stripped
14,245
7,826
TABLE I: Number of functions in dataset
The vast majority of documentation is in the form of
multi-line comments as opposed to single-line or double-slash
comments. We found that the documentation and comments
had a mean length of 42.60 and 8.14 tokens, respectively.
Figure 4 shows the distribution of the number of tokens in
source code and decompiled code. The source and decompiled
code have a mean length of 399 and 779 tokens, respectively.
Decompiled code also has close to double the LOC of source
code, with means of 30.77 and 53.42 lines for source and
decompiled, respectively.
The majority of decompiled functions are compiled with
optimisation level -O2, with a similar number of -O1 and -
O3 samples and relatively few -O0 samples. Stripped data has
a very even distribution of optimisation levels, with only -
O0 having signiﬁcantly fewer samples. Note that there are
more optimisation levels than shown in Figure 5, for brevity
the different levels are grouped into their base optimisation
5

0
1
2
3
Optimisation level
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
Decompiled
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Stripped
Decompiled
Stripped
Fig. 5: Distribution of optimisation levels in decompiled (left)
and stripped (right)
level. -Oa is grouped with -O0, -Of and -Og are grouped
with -O1, -Os is grouped with -O2. We also observe some
samples with an optimisation level higher than -O3 (-O8 and
-O7), as speciﬁed by the GCC documentation, these levels are
equivalent to -O314.
IV. BINT5
We select CodeT5 [14] as the base-model for our experi-
ments since it is the highest-scoring publicly-available model
on the CodeXGLUE [31] Code Summarisation benchmark15.
CodeT5 is a programming language model built on the T5
(Text-to-text Transfer Transformer) architecture [34] and pre-
trained on a mix of supervised and unsupervised tasks. CodeT5
employs an encoder-decoder architecture. In contrast to other
models, CodeT5 is trained using both unimodal (PL only) and
bimodal (NL-to-PL) tasks in eight programming languages.
This bimodal training allows CodeT5 to perform strong cross-
modal tasks such as code summarisation and code generation
(PL-to-NL). Many other models only use the data and lan-
guages included in the CodeXGlue dataset [15, 16, 31], while
CodeT5 also uses a mined dataset of C and C++ code for
its pre-training objectives [14]. The inclusion of C training
data should help the model with the CAPYBARA dataset.
There could be some overlap in the training data between
CAPYBARA and the dataset used by Wang et al. which would
cause leakage, we address these concerns in Section VII.
CodeT5 also utilises the transfer learning paradigm, which
allows us to train the model with relatively little data. In
this case, we make use of the CodeT5-base model, which
was trained on mixed upstream tasks by the authors [14].
We ﬁne-tune this model on the code summarization task on
CAPYBARA. An overview of how we applied the model to
create BinT5 is provided in Figure 6.
V. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
To assess the effectiveness of our approach, we ﬁrst evaluate
the performance of the model, we then identify the aspects of
the data that make this task inherently difﬁcult, and we ﬁnally
investigate aspects of the datasets and their inﬂuence on the
complexity of the task.
14GCC optimisation levels: https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc-4.4.2/gcc/
Optimize-Options.html#Optimize-Options
15CodeXGLUE benchmark: https://microsoft.github.io/CodeXGLUE/
Fine-Tuning
Base 
Model
BinT5
Evaluation
Results
CAPYBARA 
training & validation data
CAPYBARA
test data
Fig. 6: BinT5 ﬁne-tuning pipeline
A. Research Questions
In the context of the study, we thereby formulate the
Research Questions (RQ) as follows.
RQ1: How effective are ﬁne-tuned Transformer-based models
at decompiled code summarisation? To investigate the
application of existing models to binaries using CAPY-
BARA, we set a baseline by training a model on the code
summarisation task on the source C-code dataset. We then
train a summarisation model on both the decompiled and
the stripped dataset. We use the evaluation metrics to
compare the performance of the different models.
RQ2: Which aspects of the input contribute most to model per-
formance? We investigate which aspects of decompiled
code increase the difﬁculty of the task. We, therefore,
look at the impact of the symbol table on decompilation,
for this, we ﬁne-tune a model on the demi-stripped dataset
and compare it to the other models. We also investigate
the importance of the function name by removing just the
function name from the decompiled code. Furthermore,
we investigate the impact of the optimisation level by
exploring the performance per optimisation level.
RQ3: What is the impact of dataset properties on model per-
formance? We ﬁnally investigate how the construction
of CAPYBARA inﬂuences the models. To answer the
ﬁnal research question we remove the duplicates from
the datasets and retrain the models, after which we
compare the performance to the baselines. Furthermore,
we investigate the impact of dataset size, by incrementally
reducing the size of the training sets.
B. Baselines
To ﬁrst establish a performance baseline, we train a CodeT5-
base model on the summarisation task on source C. Note
that only samples which are aligned with decompiled code
are included in the source C dataset. The baseline is used to
compare the decompiled C, stripped decompiled C and the
demi-stripped datasets to the source code.
C. Evaluation Metrics
We evaluate the performance between the reference sum-
mary from CAPYBARA and the candidate summary produced
by BinT5 using the EM, BLEU-4 [35], ROUGE-L [36] and,
METEOR [37] metrics.
6

a) Exact Match (EM): The simplest metric is the EM
which scores a prediction one if it matches its reference exactly
and zero otherwise.
b) BLEU-4: The most widely used metric in the code
summarisation task is the Bilingual Evaluation Understudy
Score (BLEU) [13]. BLEU-4 produces a percentage number
between 0 and 100, which deﬁnes the similarity between a
candidate and a set of reference sentences. BLEU-4 calculates
the cumulative 4-gram precision scores, the number of match-
ing 4-grams divided by the total number of 4-grams in the
candidate sentence [35]. The unigrams and bigrams account
for the adequacy of the candidate while the longer three and
4-grams account for ﬂuency. To prevent short sentences the
result is multiplied by a brevity penalty as well. A smoothing
function is applied to prevent sequences with no matching 4-
grams to score zero [38]. While Shi et al. recommend BLEU-4
with smoothing method 4 [13], we opted to use the Moses [39]
implementation of BLEU-4 which uses smoothing method 2
since this is also utilised by CodeSearchNet, CodeXGlue and
CodeT5 [14, 20, 31].
c) ROUGE-L: ROUGE or Recall-Oriented Understudy
for Gisting Evaluation, is a package which includes several
metrics, the most popular among them is ROUGE-L [36].
ROUGE-L is more recall oriented than BLEU-4. ROUGE-L
simply ﬁnds the longest common subsequence (LCS) between
the reference and the candidate. Note that the words do not
need to be consecutive but they have to be in order.
d) METEOR: METEOR or Metric for Evaluation for
Translation with Explicit Ordering [37] uses word lists and
stemming to also take synonyms into account and calculates
the harmonic mean of the unigram precision and recall. Similar
to ROUGE-L, METEOR is more recall-focused. METEOR has
a higher correlation with human judgement than BLEU-4 [19]
at the sentence level.
D. Data deduplication
To create a deduplicated version of the CAPYBARA
dataset we make use of a fork16 of the near-duplicate-code-
detector [33]. We use this tool to compare all the datasets’
functions and ﬁnd clusters of near-duplicate functions. We
randomly select one function per cluster and discard the rest
from the dataset. We use the standard tool conﬁguration as
recommended by Allamanis. Of the removed duplicates, we
observe that a relatively large number originates from common
libraries, such as SQLite17, that are packaged with binary
programs. Thus a certain amount of duplication is also likely
to occur “in the wild”.
E. Conﬁguration
We process and visualise the data with Pandas 1.4.3 and
Ghidra 10.0.418. FastText 1.0.3 with the largest lid.176.bin
16Near
Duplicate
Code
Detector:
https://github.com/SERG-Delft/
near-duplicate-code-remover
17SQLite: https://www.sqlite.org/index.html
18It is not recommended to use Ghidra versions before 10.1 since these
versions have not been patched against a Log4J RCE
BLEU-4
EM
METEOR
ROUGE-L
C
60.83
52.19
65.33
66.51
DecomC
58.82
48.92
63.14
64.51
Stripped
11.26
1.85
14.50
17.25
TABLE II: Result of ﬁne-tuning CodeT5-base on mined
datasets
model is used to detect languages. We train the model using
Transformers version 4.16.2 running on Torch 1.9.0+cu111 in
the nvidia/cuda:11.4.0-base docker container image. We share
a Docker image with all the libraries required to run BinT5
pre-installed on DockerHub19.
A grid search of the optimal settings was infeasible from a
time perspective, so we performed training mainly using the
recommended settings from the CodeT5-base model [14]. We
double the source length for the decompiled, stripped, and
demi-stripped code to 512 tokens instead of the standard 256
tokens used for the source code to compensate for the fact
that the average length of decompiled code is almost twice as
long as the source code. We trained the model on a machine
with an NVIDIA GeForce RTX3080 with 10GB of VRAM
and an AMD Ryzen Threadripper 3990X 64-Core Processor
with 192GB of RAM running Ubuntu 20.04.4 LTS. The GPU
is running Nvidia driver version 510.60.02 with Cuda 11.6.
The authors of CodeT5 used an NVIDIA A100 GPU with
40GB of VRAM for ﬁne-tuning [14]. To compensate for the
lack of memory, we reduced the batch size to 2, which was the
maximum length that could still ﬁt in the VRAM, we increase
the ‘gradient accumulation steps’ to 24 to still achieve the
effective standard batch size of 48.
VI. RESULTS
We present the results of our experiments to answer the
research questions, results are grouped per research question.
The metrics are calculated for each sample from the test set,
and the average scores are presented.
A. RQ1: Model Effectiveness
The performance of the CodeT5-base model on each of the
datasets is presented in table II.
We found that the decompiled code model generally pro-
duced good summaries, evidenced by the BLEU-4 score of
58.82, which is slightly lower than the baseline set by the
source code. The stripped model mainly produced unusable
summaries, as evidenced by the BLEU-4 score of 11. The
high EM score could be an indication of a high duplication
factor.
Initial experiments with GraphCodeBERT [40] and Poly-
glotGraphCodeBERT [16] base models ﬁne-tuned on CAPY-
BARA show performance around 5 and 3 BLEU-4 lower,
respectively. This is a relatively small difference, especially
considering the model size. This shows that the performance of
BinT5 does not heavily depend on the additional pre-training
19BinT5 Docker Image: https://hub.docker.com/r/aalkaswan/bint5/tags
7

BLEU-4
EM
METEOR
ROUGE-L
DecomC
58.82
48.92
58.4
60.32
Demi
44.21
35.10
47.89
49.59
NoFunName
46.99
37.12
45.92
48.07
TABLE III: Result of ﬁne-tuning CodeT5-base on synthetic
data
Opt level
BLEU-4
EM
METEOR
ROUGE-L
-O0
72.88
34.18
73.19
74.84
-O1
50.30
59.84
55.36
54.84
-O2
62.31
46.23
64.50
66.05
-O3
54.68
54.99
58.25
59.28
TABLE IV: Average BLEU-4 score of decompiled code per
optimisation level
on C and C# performed by Wang et al.. Furthermore, this result
shows that it is improbable that signiﬁcant dataset leakage has
taken place.
We found a relatively large difference between the number
of recovered decompiled and stripped decompiled functions.
This can likely be attributed to the fact that Ghidra struggles
a lot more with recovering stripped functions. Recall that the
symbol table commonly contains information regarding the
location and name of functions. When this table is dropped,
the start- and endpoints of functions are hard to infer by
automatic tools, especially since many functions get inlined,
and JUMP instructions replace CALL instructions. Aside from
difﬁculties in demarcating functions, it is also difﬁcult to
align the associated source code function with the decompiled
function. With unstripped code, the function name remains,
meaning the functions can be aligned using the name. We
attempted to utilise an existing solution by Alves-Foss and
Song called Jima [41] to ﬁnd function boundaries. Jima is the
current state-of-the-art tool for function boundary detection
in stripped binaries. The tool is implemented as a plugin for
Ghidra, but in our experiments, we ﬁnd no statistical difference
between the base performance of Ghidra and Jima on our
dataset. The difﬁculties in extracting stripped functions, make
training and applying a model to stripped binaries challenging.
B. RQ2: Input Properties
As can be observed in Table III, the summaries produced
by the demi-stripped model were substantially worse than the
decompiled model, but most were still very usable, evident
by the BLEU-4 score above 44. Just removing the function
name gave quite similar results to demi-stripping. We ﬁnd that
the loss of identiﬁers signiﬁcantly lowers the performance of
the model, but stripped code also suffers from decompilation
faults, which seem to have a much larger impact on the model
performance. Hence, the performance of BinT5 on demi-
stripped code can be viewed as more representative of the
actual model and not impacted by faults introduced by Ghidra.
Table IV shows the average score per optimisation level. We
can observe that -O0 and -O2 perform better than -O1 and -
0
20
40
60
80
100
Fraction of train set
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
BLEU4
Decompiled
Deduplicated
Fig. 7: BLEU-4 per trainset size for decompiled code and
deduplicated decompiled code
O3. Recall that -O0 is completely unoptimised, and that the
vast majority of our decompiled dataset is compiled with -O2,
which would explain why those optimisation levels perform
better.
C. RQ3: Dataset Properties
The performance of the base model on each of the dedupli-
cated datasets is presented in table V:
BLEU-4
EM
METEOR
ROUGE-L
∆BLEU-4
C
45.86
32.87
46.06
47.53
14.97
DecomC
42.48
28.08
25.23
27.66
16.34
Demi
25.38
14.51
42.47
44.47
18.83
Stripped
7.19
0.00
4.75
5.50
4.07
TABLE V: Result of ﬁne-tuning CodeT5-base on the dedupli-
cated datasets and the difference with the baseline
We ﬁnd that the inﬂuence of deduplication on our model’s
performance is relatively small on source code, at only 24%.
Duplicates have a relatively large impact on the decompiled
(28%) and demi-stripped (43%) code. Deduplication also
greatly decreases the EM rate across the board. Duplicates
have a relatively large impact on performance, but even with
the duplicates removed the model still produces many high-
quality summaries. The experiments on deduplication show
that the model seems to have a deeper understanding of the
data and is not simply reproducing previously seen samples.
As can be seen in Figure 7, the dataset size does not
have much of an impact, the model can be trained with
half or a quarter of the training samples without suffering
a considerable hit to performance. This could be attributed
to the high duplication factor of our dataset. It could also be
because the model was already pre-trained well by Wang et al.
and requires very little data for ﬁne-tuning. This is a testament
to the relative ease with which these models could be extended
to decompiled code.
We also performed experiments where we did not apply the
ﬁltering rules provided by CodeXGlue and where we always
mined the ﬁrst sentence of any type of documentation. While
8

we were able to collect around 480K decompiled samples, the
model performed substantially worse, only scoring 36.97 and
33.26 BLEU-4 on C and decompiled code, respectively. These
results show that the dataset quality also heavily impacts the
model performance.
VII. DISCUSSION
In the previous section, we found that BinT5 shows con-
siderable performance for decompiled code and demi-stripped
code on both regular as well as deduplicated data. While
this is a promising result, we conduct a small investigation
of the decompiled samples. We will put our observations on
identiﬁers into the context of the extreme summarisation task.
Based on this we discuss the implications of our work. Finally,
we will close this section by discussing the threats to validity.
A. Exploration of Results
To explore the results of BinT5 we pick 25 high and 25
low-scoring samples from the test set of the deduplicated
decompiled dataset. High samples have a BLEU-4 score higher
than 75 while low-scoring samples have a score lower than 25.
a) High Samples: With the high-performing samples
BinT5 tends to produce summaries which are very close to
the references. For instance, BinT5 produced Print description
of a datatype in XML against the baseline Dump description of
a datatype in XML. Of the 25 high-scoring samples we found
that all have counterparts with a similar function summary
in the training set. These functions also tend to have similar
names, but their decompiled function body was signiﬁcantly
different, which is likely why deduplication didn’t remove
these functions.
b) Low Samples: From the low-performing samples we
observe that many summaries produced by BinT5 are seman-
tically very similar to the reference. For instance, the function
vl set simd enabled20, has the reference Toggle usage of
SIMD instructions while BinT5 produced Enable or Disable
the Simd Channel. This sample scores a BLEU-4 score of 0.0,
because of the limitations around the BLEU-4 metric, while
for a human evaluator the output is still very usable. Similarly,
for some samples, BinT5 produces shorter summaries contain-
ing shorthands. The reference Check if the given nickname is
blocked for ”normal client” use against Check whether nick is
blocked, also scores poorly. Of the 25 low-scoring samples
we observe that around 11 are semantically similar to the
reference and likely very useful for understanding the function.
B. Identiﬁers and Extreme Summarisation
We ﬁnd a relatively small difference in performance be-
tween source code and decompiled code. This indicates that
in-function comments and variable names are relatively unim-
portant for the model performance. Although Ahmed and
Devanbu observed that identiﬁers might be more important
than syntax in the code-summarisation task [16], we can
20Colmap/Colmap:vl set simd enabled:
https://github.com/colmap/
colmap/blob/87b3aa325bd8e5fb913788e29e9ac1e085e28b67/lib/VLFeat/
generic.c#L1070
further conclude that the function name is explicitly essential
for model performance. Removing just the function name from
the decompiled samples, as opposed to removing all identiﬁers
in demi-stripping, results in slightly higher performance than
demi-stripped code, which indicates a very high dependence
on the name of the function in the code summarisation task,
which is a logical ﬁnding in the context of the extreme code
summarisation task.
The extreme code summarisation task, as proposed by Al-
lamanis et al. aims to reproduce the function name given
a function body [16, 42]. It is framed as a summarisation
problem where the output is around 3 tokens in length, instead
of the 10+ tokens that regular code summarisation targets.
We found similar results when performing this task with
our dataset, namely, high performance on regular decompiled
code (with function names removed) and low performance on
stripped code.
A manual assessment of the stripped data shows that many
of the aligned functions were not decompiled properly. We
ﬁnd that many functions are cut-off after a few instructions
because the decompiler did not recover the full control ﬂow.
Other functions are missing side effects, like changes to global
variables.
C. Implications
We propose a novel solution to aid reverse engineers in
their work. If the application of NLP to binaries gets signiﬁ-
cantly better, and the limitations around stripping and other
obfuscation techniques get resolved, it would have severe
implications for the cybersecurity domain. On one hand, it
could help malware analysts understand novel malware and its
weaknesses quickly. Software can be analysed to ﬁnd possible
vulnerabilities and malicious payloads. Source code can be
reconstructed for old binaries for which the source code is
lost. But on the other hand, attackers can leverage these same
methods to ﬁnd and exploit vulnerabilities and lift intellectual
property from binaries.
CAPYBARA itself could be used to create and assess
neural decompilation, to perform a deeper investigation into
the extreme summarisation task, or to simply train a code
summarisation model on C code. CAPYBARA consists of a
large corpus of C and decompiled C code, which could be used
to pre-train language models, such that these models could
support decompiled code out-of-the-box.
While our work focused on decompiled code, our observa-
tions show some limits of transformer-based models and their
applicability to different data. Our dataset can help and inspire
other researchers to improve upon our work. We hope other
researchers use this dataset to train and evaluate their own
models. Furthermore, the process outlined in Chapter III could
help others construct standardised datasets for other tasks and
languages.
D. Threats to Validity
Internal Validity questions if other factors could have
affected the outcome. The training and evaluation data contains
9

a signiﬁcant amount of noise, either in the form of badly de-
compiled functions or incorrect documentation. We carefully
collect and process the data, but we are unable to know to
which extent the documentation matches the original code.
While machine learning models (and speciﬁcally NLP models)
should be able to handle noisy data, this might introduce some
bias into the models. CodeT5 was also pre-trained on a C and
C# dataset, this dataset is unpublished and we were unable to
reach the authors. Some data leakage might have taken place,
but as explained in Section VI it is unlikely that it had much
of an impact. To prevent this threat from arising in any future
studies, we make CAPYBARA publicly available.
External Validity refers to the generalisability of our
results. This work only focuses on stripping and compiler
optimisations as a means of resisting binary analysis, other
techniques like control ﬂow obfuscation and packing are
also used to prevent reverse engineering. Other works focus
on unpacking and deobfuscation, so we consider our work
orthogonal to theirs. The data gathered for CAPYBARA were
exclusively from open-source projects. Decompiling closed-
source projects is explicitly forbidden by some EULAs and the
lack of source code documentation makes it difﬁcult to evalu-
ate using reference summaries. However, reverse engineering
open-source software is not very useful in practice, since the
source code is readily available. Closed-source software might
have different data distribution and will present other chal-
lenges like obfuscation. Finally, only functions that decompile
(Ghidra produces any output) and that are documented, are
represented in CAPYBARA. This is most apparent in the
stripped dataset, where we can only recover a small fraction
of the total number of functions. A deeper investigation into
new decompilation techniques for stripped code, speciﬁcally
into the aspect of function boundary detection is left as future
work.
Construct Validity relates to the adequacy of the theoretical
constructs and the use of appropriate evaluation metrics. The
leading metric in our evaluations does not capture semantic
meaning. While BLEU-4 is the most popular metric for this
task, its reliability has been called into question [43, 44]. We,
therefore, included other metrics, which do take semantics into
account, in our evaluation. Finally, our entire approach hinges
on the assumption that function summaries, as they are used
for source code, are useful for binary analysis. Whether or not
this is actually the case, should be further investigated with a
qualitative user study, this is left as future work.
VIII. RELATED WORK
Binary reverse engineering and the use of NLP for software
engineering are vast and active ﬁelds, so we select and discuss
the closest state-of-the-art works in the ﬁeld. We categorise the
studies into identiﬁer recovery and binary translation. Finally,
we will discuss the open challenges and the relation of our
own work to these challenges.
a) Recovering Identiﬁers from Stripped Binaries: De-
bin [5] aims to recover debug information from stripped
binaries. The authors use a tree-based classiﬁcation and a
probabilistic graph-based model. All the variable names and
types are jointly recovered using a maximum a posteriori
probability inference. VarBERT [45] uses a Transformer-
based NLP model for the task of variable name recovery. The
authors pre-trained a BERT model which is then ﬁne-tuned to
predict the names and types from unstripped binaries.
FUNCRE
[7]
uses
a
pre-trained
and
ﬁne-tuned
ROBERTA [29] model to predict usages of inlined library
functions. Recall that compilers with optimisations enabled
can inline functions in the binary (Chapter II). The authors
use indelible markers, which do not get destroyed by the
compiler, to mark usages of library functions and to construct
a dataset and train a model.
b) Binary Translation: Neutron [10] frames decompila-
tion as a neural machine translation problem and utilises an
Attention-LSTM-based neural translation network to translate
disassembled binaries back to C source code. The binaries
are not stripped and do not have any optimisations enabled.
The translations created by Neutron can contain syntax errors,
so the authors apply regular expressions to create a tailor-
made syntax checker. Neutron achieves high accuracy on the
translation task, but only on unstripped and non-optimised
code.
c) Our Novelty: Several aspects have not been properly
addressed and investigated. The application of code summari-
sation methods to decompiled code has not been addressed
by any work at all. Furthermore, some works on binary code
fail to take compiler optimisations into account [10]. We,
therefore, investigate the application of code summarisation
methods to decompiled code and we enable compiler optimi-
sations.
IX. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a new automatic binary code
summarisation task. With this new task, we also introduce
CAPYBARA, a novel dataset to train and evaluate models
on this task, with both mined as well as synthetic data.
Paired with this dataset, we train BinT5, a Transformer-
based code summarisation model to show the effectiveness of
CAPYBARA. We used BinT5 to further explore the datasets,
outlining the inherent difﬁculties in the data.
We found that while BinT5 shows considerable performance
on regular decompiled code, but its performance is being
hampered by the decompiler on stripped code, evidenced by
BinT5s strong performance on demi-stripped code. Further-
more, we found that while duplicates have a large impact
on the model, their presence is not paramount to the model’s
performance. Finally, we observe that BinT5 could be trained
with just a fraction of the samples in CAPYBARA.
Our work has shown that a well-known and well-studied
task from the source code domain [13], namely source code
summarisation, can be applied to binary code. This is only one
of the many different applications of NLP for code. Our paper
constitutes the ﬁrst step in the application of source code NLP
methods to such tasks on binary code.
10
